Chapter 2 (U) The First Electronic Corputer: Perhaps

\(U) A Reminder of Hooper\'s Hopes and Frustrations

\(U) The development of new cipher machines and the maturation of radio
led to a critical data problem for America\'s cryptanalysts. There was
more and more data, and it was overwhelming those who were charged with
turning it into useful information for policymakers. The failure to
predict the attack on Pearl Harbor, for example, was the result of too
much data. The thousands of intercepted Japanese naval messages could
not be analyzed with the men and equipment available to Laurance
Safford\'s OP-20-G.1

\(U) Vannevar Bush realized the similarity between the challenges facing
the cryptanalysts and the ones faced by those who were trying to reform
the way the nation handled scientific information. He believed the two
groups could share technology and methods. Captain Stanford C. Hooper
might not have been aware of the trends in scientific literature, but he
was certainly frightened by increasingly sophisticated cipher machines
being introduced by potential enemies. That was what led him and his
protege, Joseph Wenger, to Bush in late 1935.2 Despite Hooper\'s vision
and Wenger\'s efforts, OP-20-G began World War II without any operating
high-speed devices. The Rapid Analytical Machine project had to begin
over again in 1942 and in conditions ill-suited to long-term
development.

\(U) The reasons for the failure of Hooper\'s 1930s plans for the
application of scientific/mathematical methods tocodebreaking are
complex. Bureaucratic tangles, bad luck, personality clashes, Bush\'s
stubbornness, international crises, and the intransigence of technology
partially account for the lost opportunity. But the major factor was
institutional. Above all else,

the military had not yet placed great faith in the kind of information
that cryptanalysis or other signals intelligence could provide.3

\(U) The Institutional Context

\(U) By the mid-1980s, Hooper and his admiring young officers feared that
America would be dragged into a war while Naval Communications was
unprepared for a face-off with any power. Hooper\'s 1930s strategy, to
collaborate with universities and corporate centers, was an attempt to
compensate for the lack of money needed to prepare for a modern war. The
Chief of Naval Operations supported his plans, but the CNO approval did
not mean smooth sailing for Hooper and his men. To Hooper\'s regret,
OP-20-G continued to have to depend on the Bureau of Engineering because
navy law and \"G\'s\" pauper budgets allowed little else. More
independence and money might have come to OP-20-G if there had been
widespread faith in signals intelligence. But despite the contributions
of Herbert Yardley\'s Black Chamber during the 1920s, then OP-20-G\'s
penetration of Japanese naval codes, and then the cracking of Japan\'s
diplomatic messages, codebreaking remained a stepchild of the American
military. 4 Ironically, the reading of the Japanese naval and diplomatic
code and cipher systems during the 1920s and 1930s masked the need for
the long-term programs required for the development of advanced methods
and machines. Even the navy\'s operating cryptanalysts did not lobby for
such a program.5 Only two men, Hooper and Wenger, saw the need and were
willing to suffer the possible career penalties imposed on those who
became advocates for unpopular causes.

\(U) Hooper and Wenger had never abandoned their 1930 hopes for machines
that would





be much more advanced than the tabulators.6 In late January 1936, Wenger
met with Bush and discussed OP-20-G\'s hopes and problems.7 Bush
presented Wenger with a handwritten eight-page outline of his plan for
automating OP-20-G\'s cryptanalytic section.8 Within a week, Wenger had
secured the new Director of Naval Communications\'s approval of the
proposed relationship with Bush.

\(U) TJie First Defeat; Bush Is Rejected

\(U) Just as Wenger proudly submitted his own visionary outline for the
reorganization of OP-20-G, he received a slap in the face. The Bureau of
Engineering refused to approve the agreement with Vannevar Bush! 9 There
was reason for the bureau\'s alienation. What Bush demanded and what
Hooper and Wenger agreed to were startling. Bush demanded having the
government pay the bill while he remained free of supervision. He wanted
the relationship with the navy to match the ideal relationship between
university researchers and major private foundations. The researcher
would submit a general proposal and then be funded without any
interference from the grantor. Following on his beliefs, Bush had
refused to sign a typical navy contract or to make any promises about
the results of his work.

\(U) In addition, the original understanding did not include a promise to
construct any machinery. Bush and Wenger had also agreed to ignore the
regulations demanding competitive bidding on naval contracts. In
addition, Bush requested what was an enormous amount of money in the
era, at least for the navy. To hire Bush meant taking precious resources
from the bureau and from OP-20-G.

\(U) A Machine Too Soon

\(U) There were also serious technical objections. Although only the
barest sketch, Bush\'s early 1936 proposal showed that he wanted the

navy to use optical scanning, high-speed data tapes, electronic
computing, and microfilm in a series of increasingly complex
cryptanalytic machines. Such technologies, Bush emphasized, would allow
processing speeds from ten to one hundred times faster than the
tabulators. Engineering thought that his recommendations were
speculative and liable to be very costly failures. Engineering\'s staff
had good reason to be worried about the technical ideas. The core
technologies Bush recommended were, to significant degrees, still
experimental.

\(U) Also, the bureau\'s engineers claimed they had their own solution to
the problem of automatic cipher machines. They were reluctant to give
Wenger even a hint of their approach, however.10 Whatever its secret
alternative to Bush\'s proposals, engineering had accepted the
tabulator. It was an off-the-shelf technology that had a stable
manufacturer. IBM knew the ropes of government contracting and was
investing in ongoing development with its own funds. Many of
engineering\'s men were already creating significant and clever
modifications to IBM\'s machines, making them more effective
cryptanalytic tools.

\(U) In addition, the views of OP-20-G\'s cryptanalysts were not
incomplete harmony with Wenger\'s. The operational cryptanalysts
wondered who could steal the time to devise the new procedures necessary
to make such strange technology useful. By the mid-i930s, Laurance
Safford and Jack Holtwick became more allies than enemies of Hooper\'s
long-term plans, but the remainder of the staff were willing to join
with engineering in seriously questioning the value of Bush\'s
machines.\" All the objections and emotions meant that by mid-1936 the
attempt to bring electronics to American cryptanalysis was deadlocked,
if not defeated. But Stanford Hooper, Vannevar Bush, and Joseph Wenger
collected the needed political support, drew up a new plan, and
outflanked the bureau and the conservative cryptanalysts.





\(U) Hooper and Wenger developed anew strategy to surmount any remaining
objections. To placate the engineers, Hooper agreed to ask Bush to
submit a more detailed and specific proposal. The new Bush proposal was
submitted to a special research group in the navy rather than to
engineering. In September 1936, within a week after he received the new
plan, Hooper reported to Bush that the prestigious research board had
approved his project. Wenger and Bush developed compromise positions on
the bureaucratic and legal objections, then presented the new proposal
to engineering. The bureau gave in, but it took almost all of October
and November 1936 to draft an acceptable contract.

\(U) Under 1937\'s formal contract, Bush agreed to focus on the details
of a particular device so that engineering could have something
concrete. He was to submit four reports, each detailing a major
component of the proposed machine. The commitment to details and the
year and one-half time limit for delivery of all the reports helped to
satisfy the bureau\'s demand for a scheduled product.12

\(U) The Decision to Build a Machine

\(U) Bush had become attached to Wenger and Hooper, and their pleas
convinced him to make a gentleman\'s promise that he soon regretted. He
told them he would try to build a machine, and if he succeeded he would
give it to the navy at no additional cost, except for shipping charges
for the finished machine.13 It had become very important to Wenger to
have a device. To ensure that his project would not die when Bush\'s
contract ended, Wenger needed a machine to prove that photoelectronics
was practical.

\(U) Bush was not sure that he could build a machine in time, but in
early 1937 he was absolutely sure of one thing: MFTs work for OP20-G
would be cut off by mid-1938 when the contract with the bureau
terminated. During the year of bickering with the navy, Bush became
involved

in an increasing number of projects that were critical to the
Institute\'s planned analysis center and his career. One consequence was
that the navy\'s project became more of a burden than an opportunity.

\(U) Bush spent much time on the initial designs for an astounding
general-purpose electronic digital computer. He sent his students and
colleagues the first of several outlines of the proposed digital device,
soon to be called the Rapid Arithmetical Machine, in January 1937.14 In
the three years after the first contacts with the navy, Bush and his men
had put all the years of struggle behind them. Bush had his \"boys\"
immersed in three highly innovative digital projects: the electronic
Rockefeller Analyser; the electronic, programmable Rapid Arithmetic
Machine; and the Rapid Selector.

\(U) Bush and Wenger Select a Problem

\(U) Bush consulted with Joseph Wenger and opted for a device to help
OP-20-G apply the latest statistical techniques to the cipher
problems.15 Bush knew that if a machine was built, it had to be one that
was reliable enough to convince the bureau to fund a long-term RAM
project. Furthermore, Bush knew that any machine he created would have
to outperform OP-20-G\'s tabulators and the special mechanical devices
l6 that had become so dear to many of its staff. His machine had to be
much faster than the electromechanical devices.17

\(U) There were many advanced cryptanalytic methods for Bush to select
from. Perhaps unknown to Bush or Wenger, the United States Army\'s
cryptanalyst, William F. Friedman, was toying with ideas about the use
of optical scanning. In April 1937, just as Bush was filling in the
design of his machine, Friedman filed a patent for a system. The
application did not mention cryptanalysis, and its examples of possible
use were related to analog business applications, such as the sorting of
packages, but Friedman must have

iaP SECRET/jeOMINT/mEL TO UflA, AU3, OAN, ODR AND NZU/X1



IUH bhLKbl/iOIMINIJIKbL IU UbA, AUt., LAN, bBK and MLU)AI

realized that optical scanning had great potential for cryptology.18
Despite such projects, Bush was facing the great challenge of creating
what was the world\'s first high-speed cryptanalytic machine. Balancing
all the factors, including his almost unshakable commitment to the three
technologies of film, optics, and electronic counting, Bush decided to
automate one of the most central new statistical methods, the Index of
Coincidence.

\(U) The Index

\(U) The method Bush and Wenger selected for the machine, the Index of
Coincidence, was the most ubiquitous of the new theoretically justified
statistical procedures. It was a formal and universal method that could
not be made worthless by a slight change in a cipher system. It was
based on the laws of probability. The Index was rugged and independent
because it needed only intercepted cipher text and because it could
attack any type of cipher system.19 It also had a wide range of powers.

\(U) The Index allowed an analyst to identify messages or portions of
messages that were produced by the same settings of an encryption
device. That was a first step to determining the wiring and settings of
the encrypting components of the machines. The Index of Coincidence
could then be put to work to identify a cipher key or the order of the
cipher wheels in a machine. Such new methods were essential to an
independent attack on the cipher devices. The stepping switch and
wired-wheel machines, such as the Japanese Purple and the German Enigma,
were designed to be unbeatable. They had cascades of transposing rotors
which repeatedly changed one letter to another. Although each rotor was
simple, together they produced a long sequence of letter substitutions
without repetition or pattern.

\(U) Such machines as Red, Purple, and the Enigma came close to creating
a random sequence, but not quite. They appeared to be ran

dom because of the length of the cycle of unique substitutions created
by the three or four rotating enciphering wheels or switches. But after
26 x 26 x26 or more rotations, the wheels returned to their initial
positions, and the machine began to repeat its letter substitutions.
That made them technically nonrandom and allowed many nations to use
Index methods against the simple Enigmas ofthe Spanish Civil War.20
However, every nation was improving its cipher machines. Additional
wheels with unique transpositions, varied latches that turned a
neighboring wheel erratically, and plugboards to further disguise a
machine\'s input-output relationships were added to many devices. The
combinations of wheels, wheel settings, and plugboard links meant that
trillions of possibilities had to be explored.

\(U) In response, cryptanalysts countered with various forms of
automation. But most, like Poland, bet on limited methods and machines,
ones to exploit the quirks of particular cipher machines or the
procedural errors ofthe enemy. There was good reason for such a turn
away from science. The German specialists in charge ofthe Enigma, who
were aware ofthe laws of probability and also ofthe speed of film and
optical machines, were confident that it would take any formal attack
too long to be of use to an enemy. Given the special defenses built into
the Enigma, they calculated that it would take any machine so long to
perform a statistical analysis that by the time a setting was
identified, its messages would be of no military value.21

\(U) When Wenger met with Vannevar Bush in 1937 to decide exactly what
type of machine to design, his goal was the creation of a device so
rapid that pure statistical analysis would be practical. After balancing
the needs of OP-20-G and the technological possibilities, he and Bush
decided to automate the heart ofthe IC method, coincidence counting.

\(U) A coincidence was the appearance ofthe same letter in the same
relative position in two or


TOP SiCRET/ZCOMiHTOREL TO UCA, AUG, OAH, ODR AND MZUX1


■mo ccrpc-n/\^MmTi/pci m iiqa aiiq cam rtRP Ann M7I »Y1

more messages or in an offset of two copies of the same message. The
method could be extended to the identification and counting of more than
single letter matches, but the essence of the Index was the counting of
single coincidences. If the number of matches exceeded the number
expected from a random distribution of letters, then both messages were
probably a product of the same wheels, wheel settings, and portion of
the encryption machine\'s cycle.

\(U) As the enciphering machines became more complex, the Index developed
an almost insatiable demand for data. The Index could be computed with
electromechanical machines, such as a counting sorter or a tabulator
with additional relay circuits. But even with the IBM machines, the
process was very slow and labor intensive; a long message could take
days to analyze. One of the reasons the Index was selected as the method
for Bush to automate was that it was so difficult to perform on
electromechanical equipment.

\(U) An Added Bonus, Possibly

(S//SI//REL) Wenger and Bush were committed to mechanizing the IC
method, and both wanted to encourage the navy\'s codebreakers to apply
mathematics, but Wenger realized that the operating codebreakers had to
use some less than \"scientific\" approaches. If Bush could automate
them, the MIT machine and statistical methods might receive a friendly
evaluation by the crew at OP-20-G. Bush agreed to sketch machines for
those rather crude methods, and he hinted that he would try to have the
proposed Comparator (for the IC) be able to perform two of them. Both
methods, the Brute-force search and Symmetrical-sequences, asked for a
search through massive amounts of data to \"locate,\" not count,
coincidences. The coincidences sought were not based on individual
letters, but matches between relatively long strings of cipher text or
long strings of text whose letters had been transposed into their
position relative to the starting

letter of the string. Both approaches were ways to identify messages
that were likely to have been produced by the same key. They were used
to find messages that were in \"depth.\" No mathematics was required; a
machine just had to sense the long coincidence and then inform its
operator where it was located.

\(U) Bush Outlines the Machine and Sets Difficult Goals

\(U) After the navy contract was signed in January 1937, Bush took time
away from his other duties to work on the architecture of his Index
machine, the Comparator. He decided to divide the project into four
major parts corresponding to functional units of the proposed machine.
Then, he chose what hardware was to be used in each. Last came an
equally challenging step, finding the four men he needed to fill out his
sketches and, perhaps, build a machine.

\(U) Bush had a frustrating time finding qualified men. The need for
secrecy made it almost impossible to locate men and still maintain good
relations with the faculty. Only three people at MIT, really two, knew
what the work was for. Bush and the project manager knew details, but
MITs president learned only that secret work was in progress. The men
who were to build the components and their regular faculty supervisors
were not told of the navy connection. Once employed, they were
instructed to be confidential about their work but not told why. They
would never be informed as to what their components were for.22

\(U) Two graduate students received the initial assignments. Jerry
Jaeger, who had abackground in machine tools and automatic controls, was
given the first task, to build the critical input mechanism. Richard
Taylor, who was already important to the Rockefeller project\'s
electronics and who would soon take charge of the Center of Analysis,
was chosen to be responsible for the electronic circuits. The third man,
who was asked





to develop the component to read the data tapes, was in a somewhat
different position at the Institute than Jaeger or Taylor. Herbert E.
Grier was a graduate of 1933 who remained at the Institute as an unpaid
research associate. Bush was unable to find the needed fourth man among
the student body. He turned to one of the Institute\'s machinists,
Walter Kershner, to design and construct what seemed to be the least
challenging part of the Comparator, its data input device. Kershner
probably had been working on a similar automatic tape punch for the
Rockefeller Analyser.

\(U) Finding a manager for the project was a greater challenge. It was
not until early summer 1937 that Bush thought he had a lead on a
qualified engineer: Waldron Shapleigh MacDonald.

\(U) MacDonald was one of the most unusual and fascinating ofMITs
students, and he remains an unrecognized figure in the birth of the
modern computer. MacDonald first appeared at MIT in the early 1930s when
he enrolled as a special undergraduate student. His initial year in
Cambridge was spent trying to prove to the electrical engineering
faculty that his lack of formal preparation was not a barrier to
academic success. Although he performed well in his classes, he was
unable to surmount bureaucratic hurdles, illness, and the depletion of
his savings. He had to leave MIT without a degree. But he quickly found
very well-paying work as an engineer and began a lifelong career as an
innovator in computers and automatic controls.

\(U) Bush offered MacDonald a professional salary and help in obtaining a
master\'s degree in electrical communications at the Institute. In
return, MacDonald was asked for a firm commitment to come to MIT to see
the navy\'s project through to completion. But MacDonald needed time to
fulfill his existing responsibilities, and he did not arrive at MIT
until September 1937, leaving only some ten months to become oriented,
to check and revise the Comparator\'s parts, prepare

reports, and assemble and test the historic machine.23

\(U) MacDonald\'s ingenuity and his hands-on engineering ability were
needed on the navy\'s 1930s project, but his role was not a truly
creative one. Well before he arrived in late 1937, the design of the
machine and the schedule for the project had been determined. His job
was to make what Bush had specified come to life and to do it before the
end of the navy contract. Unfortunately for MacDonald, he inherited a
fixed design, components which were hastily made by others, Bush\'s
order to \"get the job done on time,\" and full responsibility. By
September 1937 Bush was already too busy with his other work to attend
to the now rather inconsequential navy project. Among other things, Bush
was readying himself to assume the leadership of the powerful Carnegie
Institution.

\(U) The Comparator Really Doesn\'t Go to Washington

(U//FQUQ) Bush and Wenger were very wise insetting the limited goal of a
machine for the Index of Coincidence. Electronic computation was having
its birth pangs, and no one had a way to create a machine whose hardware
could be made to imitate any process. A major reason why all the 1930s
computers were limited in function was the absence of a viable memory
technology.24 A universal data computer, one that worked on large
volumes of input and that had high-speed memory, did not appear until
the 1950s. Then, machines such as the UNIVAC depended upon very
demanding, slow, and expensive, magnetic tape memory systems

25

(U//FQUO) Bush\'s first sketches of his Comparator reflected the
limitations of the memory and electronic technologies. Each of the
Comparator\'s four major components had its own very significant
practical challenges. The state of the technology did not allow elegant
solutions to the problems of high-speed input, sensing, count


TOP SFf.RFT)/cnuiMT»PFi TniiQA fliiQ cam nao aim mti fnri



ing, and recording. Because of the conduct of the 1930\'s Comparator
project and the nature of OP20-G\'s early wartime efforts, it was not
until late 1943 that America had more than the patched-up Bush
Comparator to represent its nearly fifteen years of attempts to build
sophisticated electronic codebreaking devices.

\(U) Too Much to Ask of Mere Machines

(T0//01//REL) The Index was a demanding cryptanalytic method. To tally
all the possible single letter coincidences in two messages calls for
(n\*(n-i)) comparisons.26 If two four-letter messages are examined for
coincidences, twelve comparisons must be made; 500 messages demanded
almost 250,000 tests; a 2,000-letter message called for almost
4,000,000. Complete analyses of long messages could take days or weeks
by hand and tabulator methods. Compounding the challenge of raw speed
was Wenger\'s demand that the Comparator be able to handle the longest
messages. There was good reason for that because the more characters in
a message the more likely that something of value would emerge from an
analysis. Fortunately, cryptologists around the world knew that messages
with too many words posed a danger to their systems and instructed that
messages be limited to as few words possible. The very upper limit was
2,000 characters. Messages of 200 characters were typical, but the need
to analyze longer ones in a timely way made speed and a large memory
important goals.27

\(U) Combined with Bush\'s desire for a minimal number of electronic
components, the call for speed created unexpected challenges for the
students at MIT. One of them was printing. To maintain speed, printing
had to be done while the tape was running. The solution Bush and his men
devised was sensible but crude, and it led to a need for an even faster
mechanical tape drive. Printing was to take place while a blank portion
of tape was running. Tn practice, this meant that approximately one half
of each tape was blank,

thus halving the number of possible comparisons during a am of the tape.
Because of that, Bush\'s men had to double the originally planned speed
of the drive to achieve the processing goals.28

\(U) Even without the tape handicap, Bush had to outdo much existing
technology to achieve his minimum Comparator speed.29 Bush wanted the
machine to deliver data to the reading station at over thirty times the
rate of standard telegraph equipment and sixty times faster than a movie
projector if it was to reach the goal of 20,000 comparisons a minute.
Even in the late 1940s, the most sophisticated high-speed transmission
\"baud rates\" were in the range of 1,800 characters a minute - or more
than ten times slower than Bush needed in order to make the navy machine
an attractive alternative. There were special highspeed drives for
sending bulk messages, and during World War II \"flash\" systems were
developed. Those devices, however, were not proven in the mid-i930s. The
talking picture industry did not provide much help. In the 1930s, moving
picture film was moved at less than 300 feet per hour.30 The Comparator
had to sense and route data at rates forty times greater than an IBM
sorter and 160 times faster than a tabulator.

\(U) Wenger thought that he might overcome the bureau\'s protests if Bush
could add parallel features to his essentially serial machine. Wenger
asked him to try to include what would be needed to make isomorphic and
three- and four-letter (polymorphic) coincidence tests that had been
discussed earlier.

(T8//SI//REL) Wenger also gave his approval for the \"locating\*
feature. It would allow what the World War II cryptanalysts called
\"brute force\" searching. Masses of data could be scanned at every
position of two messages with the hope of finding indications that two
messages had been enciphered with the same key.





\(U) No Thanks for the Memories

\(U) Because the Comparator was a datadependent machine, the greatest
problem facing Bush\'s students was how to store and retrieve
information. The Comparator needed a largescale and very high-speed
memory, but such memories did not exist in the 1930s.31 What was on the
technological horizon was not encouraging. Storage in massive banks of
capacitors or resistors, which some computer designers were thinking of
using, was too expensive, and such banks took too long to load and
unload.32 The rumors about the use of special versions of television
tubes as memory were just that in the mid19305. And no one thought that
delay lines would ever be able to hold more than a few bits of
information. In 1937 work was just beginning on magnetic memories, and
storage of large amounts of data in two or multistate electronic tubes
or relays was out of the question.33

\(U) Unfortunately for Bush and Wenger, there had been few advances in
tape technology since the introduction of modern automatic telegraph
readers in the early twentieth century. Standard teletype technology had
not evolved into a competitor to the punch card.34 In early 1937 the
only option seemed to be microfilm.

\(U) Bush thought his men would overcome the difficulties caused by film
shrinkage and distortion when the film was sped past a reading
station.35 Unfortunately, microfilm proved too difficult for a machine
that could meet the mid-1938 deadline for the delivery of the
Comparator. As a result, in mid-1937 Bush sent his students on a hurried
search for another medium and a way to move it at incredible speeds. The
MTT men chose a unique 70mm-wide paper tape that EastmanKodak used for
packaging its movie film. It was strong, wide enough to accommodate
Bush\'s coding scheme, and, very important, it blocked light because of
its acetate coating and its alternate red-black layers.36 Also, early
tests indicated the tape would maintain its structural integrity after

being punched. All those features justified the high cost of the Eastman
product although it was soon learned that its data capacity would not be
much more than that of telegraph tape.37

\(U) The disappointingly low density meant that much effort had to be put
into the development of a high-speed tape drive, one burdened with some
very special demands. In addition to the need for ultra-high speeds, the
tape transport had to pass two tapes in perfect alignment over the
reading station, then step one tape one character relative to the other
until all possible comparisons had been run.38

\(U) The Limits ofMecJianics

\(U) The first man on the summer crew was given the responsibility of
creating the mechanical combination needed to compensate for the low
data-carrying power of the Eastman tape. Already familiar with the
drives in the machines used in the cloth and newspaper industries, the
young engineer decided to center his component on a four-foot long frame
to hold the tapes. Pulleys were to maintain the required tension on the
loops of tape. Driven by a fast electric motor and a system of shafts
and gears, the tape was guided by both rollers and sprockets.39 The
entire transport was mounted on tall legs and stood some four feet off
the ground to ease the chore of changing tapes.40

\(U) The tape transport was well designed and was delivered on schedule,
but it did not reach the speeds Bush desired. At its best moments it ran
at less than two and a half miles an hour, not the five or more needed
for a truly rapid machine. The tape was the machine\'s timer and set
many of the requirements for the other major components. Once its
features were known, work on the reading station and electronic counters
could be completed. Armed with Bush\'s previous instructions and the
specifications for the tape drive, the next man tackled the problems of
photoelectric sensing.





\(U) Let There Be Light, But Not Too Much

\(U) One of Bush\'s first technical commitments was to the sensing of the
presence of light rather than its absence. Following on that, he ordered
his men to code each letter of a message by punching a hole in a column
of the seventymillimeter wide tape. There was to be only one hole to a
column of twenty-six fields. An additional field in each column served
as a timer. If a column held data, this extra field was punched. When
two active columns overlapped, light was directed to a timing cell which
then readied the sensing photocells to examine many data columns
simultaneously.

(C//SI//REL) There were to be at least ten data columns, thus letters,
packed into a linear inch of tape. To accommodate Wenger\'s need for
counting more than single coincidences, ten letters were to be read at
one time. This called for ten photocells for message characters, one to
each column.

\(U) The engineer had to create a mask to ensure that light that shone
through the first tape did not drift before it fell on the lower one. He
also had to find a lens that would direct the light beams from
overlapping holes, one for each column, onto the correct sensing
photocell. An allied problem was more challenging: he had to keep light
from a coincident column from spilling over into the area of another
column\'s photocell. The state of photocell technology did not allow
easy solutions to any of the reader\'s problems. Among other problems,
they remained fairly large. As a result, the young MIT engineer could
not put ten of them directly under the columns of the Comparator\'s
tapes. They had to be placed far under the reader and were arranged in a
\"U\" pattern. That meant that the straight, parallel light from the
coincident columns had to be accurately deflected. Moreover, complete
electronic packages for the photocells were not supplied by
manufacturers. The MIT engineer had to tune each photocell and build the
amplification circuits to

turn the signals from the photocells into the discrete pulses needed by
the third major component of the Comparator, the electronic counters.

\(U) The Most Difficult Problem of All, But It Wasn\'t

\(U) With the knowledge of the tape and photocell systems, the third
young man began his work on the final details of what everyone thought
would be the most difficult part of the project, its electronic counting
system.

\(U) Precise digital counting with electronics was in its early years,
and all attempts at creating tube-based calculating circuits were risky.
Electronic tubes were designed for analog work, and it was only
empirical tweaking that allowed them to be on-off switches. As late as
1940, the best experimental electronic counters worked at 20,000 decimal
counts a second during their cooperative periods.

\(U) One of his greatest challenges was the circuitry for the
Comparator\'s parallel-processing feature. It was needed to allow the
machine to perform the simultaneous multiple letter tests that were so
valuable to the cryptanalysts. Without parallel processing, the
machine\'s power would be reduced by a factor of four. The student
engineer had to construct five independent electronic counters which
were to tap the data from the reading station at the same time. The
young man took the safe technological route, choosing to stay with the
predictable and familiar gas-filled Thyratrons.

\(U) The choice of architecture for the counters was also driven by the
need to send the navy at least a feasible design, if not a machine, by
mid1938. Like the other electronic computer builders ofthe era, the
young MIT engineer decided to imitate mechanical calculating machines.41
His counters were decimal, not binary. Although such a design limited
the range ofthe application of a computer, it was known to work and was
simpler





to construct than binary circuits. Each of the decimal counters was to
consist of three or more rings often tubes with the needed electronics
for arithmetic carrying, power, and control.

\(U) Providing the option of performing several different analyses at one
time meant additional challenges. Bush had designed the machine to allow
the analysts to select the particular tests for each run. To permit
this, the young engineer incorporated a set of \"and\" circuits that
could be set to test for the desired combination. The Comparator\'s
Rossi \"and\" circuit was the key to the machine\'s flexibility and
parallelism.

\(U) In addition to the counters and the \"and\" circuits, the third
engineer was handed another tough job. He was given the responsibility
for creating the banks of electrical relays needed to stand between the
high-speed tube counters and the much, much slower printer. At the end
of each pass, the counters had to be polled for their contents and
numbers sent to the relays. The relays worked as a short-term memory,
sending pulses to the magnets that controlled the print bars.4\"

\(U) The Easiest Becomes the Most Difficult

\(U) There was a fourth man. He was in charge of the crucial data-entry
system. The punch for the data tapes proved to be the Achilles heel of
the Comparator. The problem was a perhaps inescapable result of the use
of paper tape, as was Bush\'s inefficient 1 of 26 coding scheme.

\(U) The technology of the 1930s led him to reject a method of coding
that could have increased densities on the tapes by at least a factor of
five and that would have led the Comparator\'s codes to fit with the
navy\'s modern communication system. The use of a five-field character
code, the Baudot code, would have allowed at least five letters to be
placed on a line (column) of the 70mm tape. But the size and sensitivity
of holes and photocells, the problems of aligning tapes, and the desire
to limit the elec

tronics of the machine precluded the use of that coding pattern.43
Bush\'s special coding scheme demanded a custom-made and very complex
mechanism.

\(U) An MIT machinist was instructed to make a keyboard-operated device
to simultaneously punch two exact copies of a message. It had to keep
the two tapes in perfect synchronization and to make precisely spaced
tiny holes in each column and row. The punch had to advance the tapes
with absolute precision. Most challenging, it had to maintain the
integrity of its tiny and sharp needle-like punching arms despite the
impact as the arms struck the Eastman tape. The machinist was asked to
devise tape cutters and the means to ensure that the spliced ends of the
tapes would not pull apart during the runs. Unfortunately, the punch was
the last component of the Comparator to be turned over to the project
manager and then it was \"not satisfactory.\" \*\* The punch\'s
inadequacies cannot be blamed on the machinist; the responsibility has
to be placed on the original design for the Comparator. Between 1938 and
1945 several teams of engineers tried to produce a viable data entry
system for the paper tapes; none was able to build a rugged and reliable
punch.

\(U) Beyond Murphy\'s Law

\(U) When Waldron MacDonald arrived in September, three student engineers
had already sent their work to local machine shops. Bush trusted their
judgment so much that, without examining the parts, he put MacDonald to
writing the descriptive reports for the navy. MacDonald took Bush\'s
first schemes for each component, added what the students had done, and
sent the reports to the navy for payment.45 The reports, including the
final one submitted in the spring of 1938, were upbeat and gave the
specifications for what everyone thought would be the first operating
electronic data processing machine,46





\(U) Although the reports contained a bright picture, the Comparator
project had fallen victim to a host of problems. But the main reason for
the problems in 1937 and 1938 was the technologies Bush so admired. They
were not ready to be turned into useful machinery. Unfortunately, the
results Bush and his young men expected on the basis of their early
bench tests did not carry through to the parts they gave to MacDonald.
The Comparator was far from ready for assembly. And only MacDonald was
left to rescue it! MacDonald had much, much more to do than simply link
the components together. Almost every component had to be reworked.

\(U) MacDonald put much thought and energy into reshaping the electronic
components, and he more than fine-tuned the tape transport. More basic
work had to be done on the reader. The optical system needed a complete
overhaul, and it took much of MacDonald\'s attention. To bring the
correct amount of light to each of the ten cells, he devised a 1930\'s
version of fiber-optics.

\(U) Thus, MacDonald\'s assignment turned into something much more
demanding than either he or Bush had imagined in mid-1937. MacDonald was
not sure that he could solve all the problems of the transport,
counters, and optical sensors. Then chance compounded an already
difficult situation. In a friendly game of touch football, MacDonald was
knocked out by an unlucky \"poke on the jaw.\" MacDonald remained
unconscious and confined to bed for several weeks. His energy was
seriously drained for months afterwards.47 Despite the injury, Bush
chose not to replace MacDonald.

\(U) What Hooper had complained about for so many years, the lack of
appreciation of science in the navy, again struck the Comparator.
Wenger, the strongest voice for a revolution in the technologies of
signals intelligence and cryptanalysis, readied himself to leave for sea
duty in mid-1938. Wenger had to spend the five months before he was
rotated putting the finishing touch

es on the detailed reports for Hooper\'s grand proposal for a modern
communications system. Wenger left the country just a month before
MacDonald shipped the troubled Comparator to Washington.

\(U) In spring 1938, MacDonald began test runs on the rebuilt parts.48 He
also had the chore of instructing the engineer the navy sent to learn
about the machine. Wenger had arranged for a bureau technician to spend
some time at MIT. During the spring, Frederick Dulong, one of the many
ex-navy men who stayed on in Washington as civilian employees, was sent
to MIT.

\(U) Wenger considered Bush very generous for having constructed a
machine and approved Bush\'s suggestion that MacDonald be hired by the
navy to fine tune the Comparator once it was in Washington. The bureau
agreed and requested MacDonald to travel to Washington with the
Comparator and to stay for three months. He was to adjust the machine
and to instruct both technicians and cryptanalysts in its use. Safford,
now in charge of the Comparator, was pleased that the bureau promised to
give him some additional, if not permanent, help.

\(U) As soon as Bush signaled that a machine would be sent to Washington,
Wenger began expensive preparations. He requested the money for tapes
and lights and extra tubes, and he readied an area for the Comparator
within OP-20-G\'s secret rooms. In a few weeks, additional funds were
requested for the hardware necessary to prepare the tapes for the
Comparator.49 Wenger went much further. Describing a new era in
cryptanalysis, he convinced the navy brass to give serious consideration
to funding more devices.50 By the end of 1938, OP-20-G\'s budget request
included more than \$20,000 for additional Bush devices and special
additions to the first machine.51 In addition, \"G\'s\" new war plans
contained a request for a Comparator for the pro




TOP SECRCT//COMINT/mEL TO USA, AUS, CAM, (5BW aim NZU/XI

posed major cryptanalytic station at Pearl Harbor.52

\(U) Spring Is a Time for Love, Not Machinery

\(U) When the Comparator arrived in Washington in late June, a month
late, it would not start,53 As bad, two of its most important parts had
not been shipped -the punch and printer. About a month behind schedule
and still only \"semifinished,\" it found anew and wellintentioned
guardian. But Fred Dulong could not give full attention to the machine.
By mid-July, Dulong was able to run the counting circuits,54 but any
more work was stalled because of the missing punch and printer. Unknown
to anyone, they had been placed in a Cambridge safe-deposit box
byMacDonald to await his return to the country in August55 following a
honeymoon.

\(U) The cryptanalysts certainly did not have the time to wet-nurse the
Comparator. While the bureau\'s men bewailed the results of becoming
entangled with an impractical professor, the cryptanalysts in charge of
the day-to-day work were coming under incredible pressures to penetrate
all of the sophisticated Japanese code and cipher systems. Japan\'s
invasion of China in 1937 had made it clear that war was imminent,56 and
by 1938 OP-20-G was facing crisis conditions. The sinking of the Panay
in December led to a scramble to protect American codes. In addition,
there were hints that Japan was about to make another sweeping change in
its codes and to introduce its Purple cipher machine.57 What energies
OP-20-G had were necessarily devoted to developing techniques and
machines that gave immediate results. Its faith was, quite naturally,
placed in the direct analogs of Japan\'s enciphering machines, and its
men wanted resources devoted to modernizing the tabulators.

(TJ) Thus Waldron MacDonald did not arrive in Washington at the right
time for any experimentation at\"G\" or the bureau. Driving from

Cambridge in August 1938, he had the Comparator\'s punch and printer in
the back of his station wagon. Working in OP-20-G\'s downtown offices,
MacDonald attempted to save his and Bush\'s reputation.

(ID He hurried the Navy Yard\'s effort to build tape duplicators and
splicers and soon convinced the bureau to build a new punch. The one
from MIT could not be coaxed into working. Don Seller took on that
challenge.58 Then MacDonald began working on the other components.
Although no major changes were made to the Comparator, it took an
unexpected fourth month of work to announce a finished machine in
November.

\(U) In late 1938, OP-20-G\'s leader, Safford, congratulated Bush and
informed him the cryptanalysts and the bureau\'s men planned to spend
the next year experimenting with the wonderful and reliable machine.
Possibly because they now realized how much a well-schooled optical
electronics engineer would cost, OP-20-G did not make an effort to hire
a replacement for the MIT engineer or, as planned earlier in the year,
to construct at least one more Comparator.59

\(U) R.AM Project Seems to Die, Late 1938

\(U) With Wenger gone, no one pressed for an immediate extension of the
program.60 Bush, in turn, quickly fended off another attempt by the navy
to link him to \"G\'s\" projects. The consequences of the failure to
continue on with the Comparator project in 1938 were severe. Soon after
MacDonald left Washington, the Comparator again became inoperable. It
was so temperamental that the only attention it received was from
Dulong, whose many other duties allowed just part-time work.61 It was
listed on OP-20-G\'s equipment roster in 1939, but it was never used,
not even on the type of important project for which it had been
designed, the breaking of the Japanese Purple cipher machine.62 Its
technical problems become so great that it was removed from the
cryptanalysts\'





quarters and sent to the Navy Yard where it could be tinkered with.

\(U) Although overworked because of the Japanese code and cipher crises,
Safford had asked for a report on the Comparator and received some very
disheartening news. Dulong responded that nothing but the electronic
counters proved reliable, and the machine had not been functional long
enough to allow in-depth development of procedures. The Navy Yard\'s men
did not think there was any possible quick fix for the device. Most
ominous was the failure of the data entry component, the punch. Even the
second version of that purely mechanical and supposedly simple mechanism
could not be made to produce precise tapes. There was little hope of
basing an entire system of analytical machines around the original Bush
design if there was not an efficient and reliable data entry device.63
In 1940, Safford, who two years before declared the Comparator a
reliable and useful invention, had to admit the machine never worked and
that the entire project had not progressed as planned.

\(U) A Comparator There May Never Be

\(U) In late 1940 Bush gained another chance to prove the power of
optical-electronic machines and the ability of academics to create the
technologies of defense. 6\* He arranged for MITs John Howard and his
men to rescue the first paper tape Comparator and to design the
longpromised microfilm version.

\(U) This second MIT OP-20-G project of late 1940 is of extreme
historical importance because it became the foundation for the United
States Navy\'s incredible Rapid Machines Program of World War II. That
little known adventure rivaled Britain\'s famous work on the Bombes and
the Colossus.

\(U) Tragically, that program is also important because of its failures.
Although it began with expectations of producing electronic digital

machines to attack the feared cipher devices of the Axis powers, it
turned to older technology and logic. To be able to provide anything of
value to OP-20-G, Howard\'s men had to step back from electronics,
digital techniques, and microfilm. Although the navy\'s cryptanalysts
began World War II with promises that electronics could be made to work,
they had to wait for almost two years after Pearl Harbor before any
machines appeared that affirmed that Bush\'s ideas had potential.

\(U) The story of John Howard\'s navy project has to begin with the
crises in Europe and Asia, policy decisions in the White House and
London, and the organization of American science in World War II.

\(U) Big Science Begins to Emerge

\(U) Bush\'s high-science friends were active in more than the cause of
research. They were among the nation\'s earliest supporters of a
positive response to the German threat. They lobbied for the creation of
the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC). The NDRC was the
realization of Bush\'s ideal of how to link academia and the military.
Given almost complete power by Roosevelt to shape the NDRC, Bush laid
down ground rules that gave power to academics to begin research
projects and to be free of military control. Having its own funds and
being a presidential creature, the NDRC and its more powerful extension,
the Office of Scientific Research and Development, could initiate
blue-sky programs and carry them through to development.

\(U) One ofthose programs interlaced the NDRC with American
cryptanalysis, but only after it had dealt with along list of projects
of much higher priority. Atomic power and radar were the leading
problems, and the scientists at the most prestigious universities and
corporate research centers received the first calls from the NDRC\'s
leaders.





\(U) The executives at the NDRC realized that atomic research and the
development ofthe potentials of radar called for advanced computation,
but, alone, those problems would have led to a minimal NDRC involvement
in computers. It was a lower priority challenge that plunged the NDRC
into computer research and established who would participate in the
navy\'s future Rapid Machine effort. Atomic scientists were calling for
electronic control devices, but most important for the history of
OP-20-G was the hope that radar could be used to automatically control
antiaircraft weapons. That led to the NDRC\'s involvement in the
development of electronic fire control computers in the early 1940s.65

\(U) The exploration of such electronic digital machines was the perfect
type of work for the NDRC because it centered onunproven and
experimental technologies. The NDRC\'s scientists believed that digital
electronics had potential, and they rekindled the fire control projects.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars were poured into fire-control computer
and atomic-counter work in the first two years of NDRC\'s life.

\(U) Fire Control

\(U) The NDRC began the first stages of its fire control project in June
1940. Bush\'s old friend Warren Weaver ofthe Rockefeller Foundation
assumed command. The research at RCA, which had led to the design ofthe
fastest binary circuits in the nation, if not the world, was picked up
by the NDRC. Then Weaver coordinated the work at RCA with wide-ranging
explorations at Eastman, MIT, Bell, and, to some extent, NCR Of
significance for the history of OP-20-G\'s machines, IBM was again left
out ofthe NDRC circle although its centers of electronic research were
working on quite advanced components and systems.66

\(U) Because ofthe NDRC\'s stimulus, by the time of America\'s formal
entry into the war, RCA Eastman, Bell, and MIT had several proposals for
digital-based fire control systems, ones the NDRC

evaluators thought had great promise. In the spring of 1942, meetings
were called, and all participants shared their knowledge and designs.67
The reports ofthe fire control projects were made available to the
American technical community, which now included John Howard. He was
made aware ofthe designs for the most advanced computer components.

\(U) Many ofthe fire control developments would find their way into
cryptanalytic machines and into such pathbreaking computers as the
ENIAC. By mid-1942, there were great hopes for the development of at
least a prototype electronic gun controller. But Warren Weaver and his
assistants concluded that digital electronics was too good. It was too
fast and too precise for the guns used by the military. In July 1942 the
fire control program was dropped - but with three important exceptions.
The development projects for the Eastman film-based analog-to-digital
signal converter and RCA\'s fabulous multifunction Computron tube were
to be continued, as was NCR\'s counting circuit research. Although they
were viewed as long-term projects, the three efforts were financed for
only a few more months because the press of other work forced the NDRC
to abandon them.68

\(U) The Second Comparator

\(U) Meanwhile, just weeks after the work on high-speed electronic
counters and fire control computers had begun, Bush and OP-20-G came
together. A visit with Bush in early summer 1940 indicated a reawakening
of interest in the original Comparator, which had sat unused at the Navy
Yard for almost two years. But it was not until October 1940 that
anything was done about its future.

\(U) A limited and secondary role for MIT was unacceptable to Bush,
however. He returned to his old demand for freedom from bureaucratic
control, and, within a few weeks, he was able to reshape the first
murmuring about a new





Comparator into a project that satisfied his ambitions. Bush wanted a
prototype of a microfilm Comparator. While the first Comparator would
continue to be a paper-tape, the second generation Comparator was to be
centered about microfilm. Bush soothed Laurance Safford\'s anxieties
about optical and electronic machines and told him that the new
microfilm version of the Comparator would be delivered in time to be of
use in the coming war. In late 1940, Safford encountered litde
resistance to the idea of transferring the project to MIT. The navy\'s
cryptanalysts were too busy battling the Japanese naval code, and too
worried about taking on the German systems to care about the loss of
control over unusable machinery.

\(U) 0P-20-G and Ultra

\(U) The navy\'s bureaucrats were less happy about yielding control. They
agreed to most of Bush\'s conditions although they did want a contract
and agreed to have the MIT work coordinated through the navy\'s Office
of Research and Inventions. The BuShips\' (Bureau of Ships) demands in
late 1940 were much less severe than in 1935, but it took some
additional political maneuvering to put the Rapid Machine project back
into the hands of the MIT students.

\(U) Under the 1940 agreement with the Bureau of Ships, Bush had full
control of the new Comparator project, and his men were to work at MIT,
not at the Navy Yard. The navy also agreed to wait for the results of
the new MIT work before considering the construction of any more Rapid
machines with or without MIT involvement.

\(U) As early as mid-1940, the most important Americans were informed of
some of Britain\'s promising though still limited powers over a few
German cryptologic systems. But OP-20-G was not told how to break the
Enigma or other important ciphers. Despite the British promise to share
the information from Ultra, the Americans feared a British monopoly over
Enigma. In addition, in early summer 1940 there were fears that Britain
would collapse. OP-20-G\'s cryptanalysts worried they would have to
assume responsibility for Enigma, something for which they were totally
unprepared.69

\(U) The U-boat threat had already led to British pleas that OP-20-G and
Naval Intelligence shift their scarce resources to direction-finding and
traffic analysis to compensate for their inability to read any
significant German naval system.70 The cryptanalysts in Washington thus
had little time to waste on what some of them regarded as Bush\'s
technological fantasies. The navy\'s engineers, already overworked
creating analogs of encryption machines, building advanced radio
equipment, and helping to revise OP-20-G\'s tabulators, were happy to be
rid of the \"college professor\'s\" folly.

(3//3I//REL) OP-20-G may not have told Bush, but it was not relying
solely upon his ideas for machine processing; it had to protect itself
through the use of older and proven technologies. The experienced
cryptanalysts had insisted on a tabulator program, one that was to
remain under their direct control. MFTs men were to have no say about
the new tab projects. In early 1941 IBM was contacted about making the
major changes in its machines required to allow its equipment to perform
new tests. For example, relays were added to the machines to strip
superencipherments from the Japanese code and to flag repetitions of
code groups. By mid-year IBM was asked to do much more and to give
OP-20-G very special attention.71

\(U) Bush was finally able to circumvent the bureaucracy and go his own
way, perhaps with ambitions to create a full Rapid Machine center at the
Institute, one free of military interference.72 The old Comparator was
to be shipped to MIT for repair, and a new one was to be designed and
constructed in Cambridge.

\(U) Howard quickly became the man in charge of the Comparator project.
Although the





::: {style="width: 67.68627450980392%;"}
:::

\(S) 70mm Comparator

future of Bush\'s ideas rested upon the new microfilm Comparator, the
old paper tape machine and its punch became the focus of attention. The
punch was a critical problem because its two previous versions were
failures. Understandably, Howard urged his men to use caution as well as
creativity, but the slow tempo of his project soon generated concern
within the Bureau of Ships. During the first months of 1941, as time
passed without results, the navy found it more and more difficult to
accommodate having its project run by a civilian agency.

\(U) So Long for So Little

\(U) It took almost a full year to redo the old Comparator, the only
Rapid Machine. It arrived in Washington three weeks after the Japanese
struck at Pearl Harbor.73 It may have taken longer than expected to
deliver the old Comparator because of adding one new feature to Bush\'s
1938 design. The \"locator\" performed a function the navy had thought
of adding in the late 1930s. It allowed the use of a transverse tape to
find more, complex pattern matches than was possible with

the original system. With the locator, the codebreakers could quickly
identify which messages held important code or cipher groups.74

\(S) In the private language of the codebreakers, \"locating\'\' was a
Brute Force approach to finding possible \"depths.\"

\(U) Once inaction in mid-1942, the old Comparator did help crack the
Japanese naval attache cipher machine, but the Comparator\'s newest
punch also malfunctioned.75 In addition, the machine\'s bad temper
called for a visit by one of the MIT men, Larry Steinhardt, who had to
simplify the device to achieve reliability.76

\(U) The Search for the Second Comparator

\(U) While struggling with the old Comparator, the young men at MIT paid
attention to its new microfilm version. In early November 1941, the
MIT-NDRC group was so positive about the future of a microfilm
Comparator that Bush obtained another signifi





cant grant from the NDRC.77 Then, although the NDRC was not supposed to
be involved in production, Howard awarded a \$25,000 contract to
National Cash Register\'s electronics laboratory. Joe Desch agreed to
build as many as thirty copies of the sets of new high-speed counters
and fast printers needed for the future microfilm Comparators.78

(ID In a November 1941 meeting, it was declared that construction was
ready to begin on the next Comparator. Expecting to see the newest
Comparator in a few months and viewing the MIT group as a long-term
resource, the OP-20-G analysts outlined needs for other devices. One of
those outlines had a hidden significance. It would connect the MIT men
to the Ultra Secret although they did not know of Britain\'s ability to
crack the Enigma nor of the critical negotiations between OP-20-G and
Britain over sharing intelligence secrets.

\(U) Not Equal Partners in Ultra

\(U) Agreements were made at the very highest levels in 1940 and 1941 for
Britain and America to share cryptanalytic methods as well as the
military information that came from signals intelligence. However,
England\'s wizards did not have a mathematical solution to the Enigma!
Without good guesses as to key words in messages and knowledge of the
inner workings of the Enigma radio networks, Britain could, and would,
become deaf.79

naval Enigma. However, they made little progress toward what the
Americans needed, a purely mathematical cryptanalytic solution.

\(U) Although she had helped break into similar devices, was informed of
some of the British methods, and labored for almost a year, Driscoll
could not find the ways and means for an American Enigma solution.
Fortunately, she was willing to ask for help. During the November 1941
meeting between MIT and OP-20-G, she described her needs, and Howard was
asked to think of ways to automate her \"problem.\" She was determined
to develop a method more permanent than the ones Britain had chosen.
Apparently, that called for a machine somewhat different from the
Comparator. Howard accepted the responsibility, and Driscoll was happy
with the promises by the young men from MIT.80

O Agnes Meyer

(C//KF.I)) Perhaps it was the fragility of the solutions that made the
British somewhat less willing to share their secrets with the Americans.
Whatever the reason, the Americans began to think it was necessary to
have their own antiEnigma capability. In late 1940, OP-20-G shifted
their one professional cryptanalyst, who had just made the first entries
into the Japanese fleet code, to the German problems. The venerable
Agnes Meyer Driscoll and three young navy officers began an attack on
the frustrating German

\(U) Another Machine That Wouldn\'t

\(U) The cordial meeting with Howard in early November 1941 impressed
OP-20-G\'s people. But OP-20-G and the Bureau of Ships became very
worried and skeptical about university work when, just a few days after
the Washington conference,81 Howard wrote the navy that experiments were
showing the new Comparator\'s microfilm to be deforming when used in
test





assemblies. The navy must have wondered how it could have taken the MIT
group so many years to discover its primary technological assumption was
untenable. They may also have asked how OP-20-G\'s need for
revolutionary cryptanalytic devices could be fulfilled if the
responsibility continued to be left in the hands of the inexperienced
NDRC and the young MIT students - people who failed to test underlying
assumptions before wasting a critical year\'s work.

\(U) The Revenge of Mechanics: Rounds

the First

\(U) While John Howard had been facing up to the failures of photo-optics
and electronics, some practical men were creating immediate
\"mechanical\" solutions to cryptanalytic problems. Beginning in late
1940, the engineers in the army\'s and navy\'s cryptanalytic branches
began to work closely with IBM and its engineers. The outcome was the
first operational special-purpose cryptanalytic machine and the first of
a long and important series of modifications to IBM\'s standard
offerings.

(TD//0I//REL) By spring 1941, the army had its Gee Whizzer working on
the transposition ciphers of several nations, and the navy was about to
receive the first of its special IBM Navy Change Machines.82

(TS//SI//REL) Logs and Relays Gee Whizzer

the

(TS//SI//PJEL) The Gee Whizzer had been the first to arrive. In its
initial version it did not look impressive; it was just a box containing
relays and telephone system type rotary switches. But when it was wired
to one of the tabulating machines, it caused amazement and pride.
Although primitive and ugly, it worked and saved hundreds of hours of
dreadful labor needed to penetrate an important diplomatic target. It
proved so useful that a series of larger and more sophisticated

\"Whizzers\" was constructed during the war. The last of the four
versions had an electronic matrix and was in operation throughout the
decade. The navy admired the Whizzer so much that it built its own
version, the Jeep.83

(T0//3I//REL) The Gee Whizzer was born because of a specific problem
that arose in early 1941. It was the Japanese diplomatic service that
had caused the SIS group to search for a new type oftechnological
solution. When the Japanese made one of their diplomatic
\"transposition\" systems much more difficult to solve through hand
anagramming (reshuffling columns of code until they made \"sense\"), the
American army did not have the manpower needed to apply the traditional
hand tests.

(Tfl//3I//REL) Friedman\'s response was to try to find a way to further
automate what had become a standard approach to mechanically testing for
meaningful decipherments. His search did not include electronics.
Rather, he told Leo Rosen to find quick ways to extend the power of

::: {style="width: 40.29792238337907%;"}
:::

(TS//SI) Gee Whizzer

Page SO



TOP OCCRnV/COMINTOREL TO USA, AU8, CAM, OBR ANP WZU/XI

the IBM machines that were beginning to arrive at his offices in greater
numbers. Rosen\'s first task was to learn how automatic anagramming
worked.

(TS//SI//RFI1) One of the most traditional ways of hiding the plain
language or even the codes in a message was to transpose the columns of
the text. With columns moved around in a random way, it was very
difficult for those who might intercept a message to realign the text to
its original order. The old hand attack had been to move one column
after another against each other with an analyst making continuous
judgments as to whether the new alignments were building towards a
meaningful plain language arrangement. That was a tedious and
time-consuming process.

(T9//SI//PFI) During the 1930s the SIS had made some progress towards
easing the analysts\' burdens. Statistical studies of various languages
had been made and a system of weights had been calculated. Turned into
\"logs\"(logarithms) so that addition rather than multiplication could
be used to build scores for combinations of letters, log weights were
assigned to each letter in a transposed message. As each of the columns
was rearranged, the weights were summed and an evaluation was made as to
whether the sum approached that expected for a column of plaintext. If
the logarithms of the statistically expected frequencies of the
combinations were high, it indicated that the correct order of the text
columns had been found. The results were double-checked by an analyst to
see if the realigned columns made plain-language sense.

(TS//ST//FFL) The log weight method had been implemented on the
tabulating machines, but the process entailed much special cardpunching
and many runs of the cards to align all the columns. Worse, the
tabulator method did not include an automatic test for plain-language
\"build-up.\" That meant that bad column sequences might be run for too
long and, worse,

all results were printed out. All of those usually worthless printouts
had to be examined by an analyst.

\(U) The method worked, but it was very, very labor intensive even with
the use of tabulators. It took too much time to feed the round after
round of cards that were required to test all columns of a transposed
message against all others.

(T0//0I//REL) Rosen and the IBM consultants realized that not much could
be done about the cards; there was no other viable memory medium. But it
was thought that it might be possible to eliminate all but significant
results from being printed. Rosen and his men, with the permission and
help of IBM, turned the idea into the first and very simple Gee Whizzer.
The Whizzer\'s two six-point, twenty-five-position rotary switches
signalled the tabulator when the old log values that were not
approaching a criterion value should be dropped from its counters. Then
they instructed the tabulator to start building up a new plain-language
indicator value.

(TS//SI//REL) Simple, inexpensive, and quickly implemented, the Gee
Whizzer reinforced the belief among the cryptoengineers in Washington
that practical and evolutionary changes were the ones that should be
given support.

\(U) The Navy Gets Some Changes

(U//POUO) OP-20-G\'s enlisted grade intra use engineers felt the same
way and argued for the help they needed to turn their imaginative ideas
for true cryptanalytic machines into hardware. Their requests reached
the office of the Director of Naval Communications and in mid1941
Captain Redmond informed them that he had used his personal influence to
get IBM\'s Tom Watson to agree to help the navy.

(U//FOUO) An IBM executive immediately came to Washington, listened to
the ideas of Pete

TOP GCORETOOOMlHTf/nCL TO UCA, AtiS, CAM, GOR AMD H2U/X1



IUH S&UKblJ/lUIVIINUIKbL I\'O USA, AUS, CAW, QBR diiJ NZL//XI

Deffert and Lou Holland, and gave his blessing to their hopes for
advances more radical than just attaching relay boxes to standard
machines. An IBM engineer was soon assigned to duty at \"G,\" and he
began to refine the navy engineers\' suggestions and to forward them to
IBM\'s designers.

(TS//SI//REL) Within a few months the first Naval Change (NC) was up and
running. The NC1 automatically sensed the beginning of a series of cards
and then punched an increasing serial number in each successive card.
IBM delivered a more complex machine just a few weeks later. The new
automatic cross-footer also worked from the day it was installed. It
provided a high-speed means of decrypting additive cipher systems, such
as those used by the Japanese Navy.

\(U) The NC series was continued throughout the war. The thirteen
different machines became progressively more complex, but each worked,
and none were burdens to the maintenance engineers at MG.\" 84

\(U) The Greatest Kludge of.All, But It Worked

(0//GT//REL) The navy\'s enlisted men were involved in something more
ambitious: the construction of the mechanical contraption that worked,
the M4. The Washington Code and Signal Section\'s electricians and
machinists put fifty wheels, each having thirty contacts and ten
stepping notches, together with ten banks of lights and a set of hand
cranks, to provide an automatic way to identify what additives had been
used in Japanese messages. The machine exploited a weakness in Japanese
systems -all the code groups had to be divisible by three.

(S//SI//RBL) To find a likely additive, ten code groups were set on the
machine; then the additive was entered with the cranks, and finally the
machine was ordered to find out how many of the resulting deciphered
code groups were divisi

ble by three. The lights told the operator which groups were \"over,\"
\"under,\" or \"divisible.\" m

\(U) Trying to Save Bush\'s Reputation

\(U) John Howard was probably not told of the triumphs of the practical
navy engineers and the old technologies, but he knew that he had to do
something to save Bush\'s dream. He came up with a very rudimentary
substitute for the film comparator.

\(U) He advised the bureau that photographic plates could be substituted
for microfilm.86 Although very pessimistic, Howard did not give upon the
Comparator entirely. But the new Comparator project seemed to be another
very embarrassing disaster. The bureau certainly was unhappy, and the
navy\'s cryptanalysts thought they might be left out of the electronics
revolution.

\(U) Bush was upset that his plans for electronic cryptanalysis were in
trouble. There was almost nothing to show for a decade\'s work. And John
Howard\'s bad news could not have come at a worse time for the navy. He
made his confession about the microfilm Comparator just as the American
intelligence agencies were frantically searching for the final clues to
where Japan would attack. In a few weeks OP-20-G had to face the
consequences of the failure to predict Pearl Harbor. But a combination
of factors gave Bush\'s young men yet another chance. The ability of
Howard to continue on independently (because he had a year\'s NDRC
funding remaining) was important, but a more significant reason was the
combination of the return of Joseph Wenger and the political influence
of Vannevar Bush.

\(U) Yet Another Chance

\(U) Wenger returned from sea duty in the summer of 1941. Although
assigned toOP-20\'s war plans section,87 he contacted the cryptanalysts
and Bush about the outcome of the year of





NDRC work. After hearing of the situation, and despite Howard\'s bad
news, Wenger talked with his contacts at OP-20-G and pleaded for a
continuation of the relationship with MIT.88 His urging and the navy\'s
dread of alienating the head of the NDRC, Vannevar Bush, allowed Safford
to begin a program that would be vastly expanded when Wenger was sent
back to OP-20-G in early 1942.

\(U) When the Ciphers Can\'t Be Broken

\(U) Wenger\'s influence at OP-20-G was the result of his long
involvement in modernizing naval communications. He had a reputation as
an expert in all communications fields. He was America\'s leading
advocate of a high-tech alternative to cryptanalysis. In the 1930s,
Wenger predicted that unless massive breakthroughs were made in
cryptanalysis, such as the construction of a full range of Rapid
Machines, it would be foolish to rely upon direct communications
intelligence such as codebreaking. Until America built a truly
innovative mathematical cryptanalytic capability, he argued, other
signals intelligence resources had to be exploited. Wenger argued that
codes and ciphers were becoming too complex to crack with available
techniques, and, as important, an enemy\'s frequent changes of systems
would always create blackouts at the most critical moments.89

\(U) Wenger had become America\'s advocate for what became known as
\"traffic analysis.\" He had spent years studying and developing T/A In
traffic analysis, the concern was not with the content of messages but
with the easily identified callsigns of senders and receivers, the
timing and numbers of messages in a network, and the shifts in patterns
of transmissions. 9° Although not as glamorous or exciting as
cryptanalysis, traffic analysis was not a low-tech activity.

\(U) Many aspects of T/A called for more esoteric and expensive hardware
than traditional codebreaking. The method depended upon sophisticated
direction finders to locate enemy

stations and on other expensive radio equipment.91 It was also very
demanding in terms of personnel and data processing equipment.

\(U) The first step for T/A was the ability to intercept enough messages.
Revolutionary automatic scanners searched for active channels,
oscilloscopes helped identify stations and operators, and very sensitive
receivers plotted transmissions.92 The hardware was not the end of it,
however. Optimal radio interception and plotting called for advice from
physicists; the exploitation of the intercepts needed advanced
statistical-analytical techniques. The intercepts and location estimates
had to be correlated and subjected to time-consuming analysis. The
tabulators were frequently called upon to compile the necessary
interaction matrices. The expense and manpower T/A needed seemed
worthwhile. Wenger\'s reconstruction of Japanese naval maneuvers from
T/A analysis during the mid-1930s was a triumph.

\(U) By 1940 OP-20-G\'s intercept crews were logging thousands of
messages a month from the Pacific and the Atlantic, and the method was
considered essential. The SIS had also begun to appreciate T/A and sent
its top men to the Canal Zone and Hawaii to establish intercept and
processing sites. Those investments were inescapable. With America and
Britain unable to read the most important German systems, T/A was the
only hope in the West.93

\(U) T/A had its limits, however. It could not reveal long-term plans; it
gave just a picture of immediate intentions. It had other imperfections
as well. The most important was a dependency on very frequent
communications. If a station did not broadcast, it could not be
identified and located. Tragically, in 1942 T/A was unable to deal with
the German submarine onslaught because the submarines off the American
coast followed a routine of radio silence.





\(V) Wenger to the Rescue

\(U) Joseph Wenger\'s influence atOP-20-G was not diminished by the
failure of T/A to live up to its promise. In 1942 he was granted the
power he needed to implement his plan for a centralized organization for
naval communications intelligence. Wenger\'s ideas were quickly
accepted.94 Along with the approval of his plan came his appointment as
the operating head of\"G.\" In February 1942 he began to reorganize
\"G\" and to revive Hooper\'s dream of bringing science and
cryptanalysis together.

\(U) But those were difficult times for Wenger. In early 1942 the U-boats
began to slaughter dozens of freighters insight of the American coast.
The U-boat threat to the Atlantic convoys was growing so fast that a
continuation of the sinkings threatened Britain\'s survival. Britain was
unable to penetrate the new naval four-wheel Enigma, and OP-20-G
remained without any power over German systems.

\(U) Mathematics to Meet the Great Challenge

\(U) The Atlantic crisis had a strange impact on OP-20-G\'s future. It
both helped and hindered Wenger\'s crusade for the Rapid Machines. In
its first phases, the crisis aided him. As part of his outline for the
expansion of OP-20-G, Wenger had planned for the creation of a special
research group. Its mission was to apply formal mathematics to
cryptanalysis. OP-20-G had never before had a professionally trained
mathematical team. In February 1942 Wenger brought together the few
professional mathematicians who had already been called to service and
had them join the T section. Of significance for World War II and the
history of the Rapid Machines, they were handed more than mathematical
responsibilities. They were ordered to take on some technical radio
problems. In addition, they were given some of the responsibility for
the critical German systems.

\(U) Next, the \"M\" section was handed Wenger\'s pet, the Rapid Machines
project. Luckily, Wenger found the right man, Howard Engstrom, to direct
the third major attempt to make optics and electronics into
cryptanalytic tools. When first called for the war crisis, Engstrom was
asked to give advanced technical advice to OP-20-G\'s radio intercept
and direction finding group.95 That T/A assignment was a very important
and demanding post. But heading \"M\" turned out to be much more of a
challenge. The new job called for political as well as technical skills.
By spring 1942 the Rapid Machines had again become political creatures.

\(U) The apparent failure of Howard\'s 1941 microfilm Comparator had not
ended his work or the interest of OP-20 in cryptanalytic machinery. But
it did reopen the old battles over control of innovation in the navy.

\(U) Bureaucracy vs. Science, Again

\(U) Pearl Harbor, despite the blame hurled at the army and navy
intelligence agencies, led to the release of funds and energies for
cryptanalysis. For the first time in its history, OP-20-G had enough
money to pursue technological dreams. In response, in early 1942,
Safford, still the head of OP-20-G, initiated a survey of needs and
wrote out a wish list that included Rapid Machines. There was enough
money to explore all options. The first choice of the operating
cryptanalysts was IBM electromechanical machinery. They asked for more
standard equipment and for the development of a host of special
attachments. Safford, not yet having an \"M\" section, and very short of
personnel, turned to the Bureau of Ships for technical and
administrative help.

\(U) He found it easy to convince the bureau to deal with the trustworthy
IBM. Very soon, the Bureau of Ships established what it saw as a
harmonious three-way relationship between IBM, the old hands at\"G,\"
and itself.





\(U) In the first weeks of 1942 the bureau decided to allow OP-20-G to
invest navy funds in an exploration of Rapid Machines, but it demanded a
heavy price, one which included a radical change in the relationship
between MITs men and the navy. The bureau\'s men, not those from
OP-20-G, were to run the technical and financial parts of the program.
Above all, the bureau wanted the projects out of the halls of MIT. Its
officers demanded that all work be done by established corporations that
followed the navy\'s standard procedures. But in early 1942 it began to
take charge of the NDRC project, giving, it thought, badly needed
managerial direction.

\(U) Meanwhile, the bureau explored ways to decrease its dependency on
Bush\'s group. Then the bureau decided to show its power. It took the
Comparator away from Bush and MIT. In March 1942 Bush\'s structure for
linking the military and academia, at least for cryptanalytic machines,
began to be dismantled. The work at MIT, perhaps with the exception of
the designing of a punch, was ended, and the secret workshop was shut
down!

\(U) A Seeming Victory for Science

\(U) As soon as Wenger had returned to \"G\" and learned of the bureau\'s
actions, he feared that the corporate projects would produce machines
the cryptanalysts could not use. Wenger began an attempt to shift power
back to OP-20-G. A search was begun for experienced engineers to augment
the \"M\" group. By the end of 1942 OP-20-G had some of the leading men
in computer electronics. Through formal and informal means, the name
\"M\" came to mean machinery as well as mathematics.96

\(U) Wenger convinced the bureau to give OP20-G\'s Rapid Machine program
near autonomy as well as its own facility and workforce. But it took a
major intelligence crisis to achieve that. Wenger would not have been so
successful and there would not have been a Naval Computing

Machine Laboratory at the NCR factory in Dayton, Ohio, if the British
had been able to conquer the German submarine Enigma system or if the
White House had insisted that OP-20-G remain dependent on Britain\'s
Ultra.

\(U) The establishment of the Naval Computing Machine Laboratory and the
increased power of the Rapid Machine group did help OP-20-G to build a
series of innovative cryptanalytic machines, including the American
version of the Bombe. By the end of the war, the American navy had some
of the world\'s most advanced electronic machines.

\(U) Notes

1\. (U) A recent study of the messages intercepted by the Americans in
1941 concludes that if there had been the manpower to decode all the
messages it would have been clear that Pearl Harbor was a target.
Frederick D. Parker, \"The Unsolved Messages of Pearl Harbor,\"
Cryptologia 13(1991): 295.

2\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper: March
3,1933 to January 1,1935, Correspondence with Redman and Jewett:
\"Contact scientists\"; June 1,1934, \"Binaural Sons of C\"; October 20,
1935, \"Travel to Laboratories\"; Box 18, Hooper to Secret Naval Board,
\"Communications Plan,\" February 7,1936; June 10, 1935, \"McDowell,
Contact scientists\"; and November 20, 1935, \"Travel to Boston.\" Navy
Biographies Section OI-140, 27 April 1945, \"Rear Admiral Stanford C.
Hooper, U.S. Navy, Deceased.\" NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security
Group History to World War II,\" 269.

3-(U) Note that Hooper\'s plan came almost a decade before the British
began their now famous project atBletchley Park to develop automata for
cryptanalysis. For an example of the results of his efforts to modernize
OP-20-G, NARA RG457, SRMN083, \"Military Study of Secret Radio Calls,\"
January 8, 1938, by Joseph N. Wenger.

4\. (U) The navy did not include signals intelligence in its formal war
plans until 1937. NARA RG457, SRMN-084, \"The Evolution of the Navy\'s
Cryptologic Organization,\" 3. On the attacks against military and





diplomatic codes in the early 1930s, NARA RG457, SRH-159, \"Preliminary
Historical Report of the Solution ofthe \'B\' Machine,\" 12. RG457,
SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War II,\" 82, NARA
RG457, SRH-305, The Undeclared War; The History of RI,\" 15 November
1943, byLaurance F. Safford, Captain, U. S. Navy.

5\. (U) See Harold G.Bowen, Shy)s, Machinery and Mossbacks; The
Autobiography of a Naval Engineer (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1954), on the battle over high-pressure steam and formation of
combined bureau in 1939. NARA RG457, SRMN-084, \'The Evolution ofthe
Navy\'s Cryptologic Organization,\" 3. A very useful survey is David
Kahn, \"Roosevelt, Magic and Ultra,\" Cryptologia 16 (1992): 289-319.

6\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper: June 10,
1935, \"McDowell, Contact scientists\"; November 20, 1935, \"Travel to
Boston\"; Box 18, \"Johns Hopkins Atomic Energy,\" November 3, 1937; and
March 3,1933 to January 1,1935, Correspondence with Redman, Jewett,
\"Contact scientists.\" NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group
History to World War II,\" 268-269.

\%(U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval SecurityGroup History to World War
II,\" 269, \"Hooper to Wenger\" November 1935,270. January 2,1936,
\"Bush Report.\" Office of Naval Research, Bush Comparator Patent file,
\#2,873,912.

8.(U) A thorough search ofthe OP-20-G archives and the holdings ofthe
NRL and, by implication, those ofthe Bureau of Ships, did not lead to
the recovery of a copy of the original outline or Bush\'s first sketches
of the Comparator. tSi,However, citations to the Bush documents were
located on the old catalog cards ofthe NSA Technical Library. NSA, CCH,
Card Catalog for Technical Library; Correspondence File: Bush Comparator
1936-38; Early Comparator Design Proposals: Bush Comparator 1936-37;
Machine Proposals and Miscellaneous Material: Bush Comparator,
1936-1938; Navy Correspondence File and Historical Summary Bush
Comparator, 1936-45; Six Project Reports: Bush Comparator, 1937-8; Bush
Comparator Drawing \#1-87 and Index, 1937; Summary of Materials on
Symmetrical Sequences: Bush Comparator; Bush Comparator Drawings \#88

153, 1937. f\[3005\]- (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Memoranda on SIS,
Formation of Cryptanalytic Group\" from CCH Series XIK, Box 13, circa
1929

1939.

9.(U) NSA RAM File, January 28, 1936, DNC to Bureau of Ships, \"Support
Bush proposals,\" and July 21, 1936, Bureau of Engineering toOP-20-G,
\"BuEng refuses Bush.\" NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group
History to World War II,\" 269.

10\. (U) There is some indication the Bureau\'s men eventually outlined
their solution, but no documents have been released. In the absence of
any specifics, one can only guess at their alternative. Wenger remarked
that the Bureau never really understood what he wanted. NARA RG457,
SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War II,\" 269.

11\. (U) Susan M. Lujan, \"Agnes Meyer Driscoll,\" Cryptologia 5 (1991):
47. James Rusbridger and Eric Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York:
Summit Books, 1991). Cipher A. Deavours, and Louis Knih, Machine
Cryptography and Modem Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech House,
1985), 218. NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World
War II,\" 161, 247. The Holtwick M-i machine was in operation by
mid-1937, perhaps earlier.

12\. (U) Jeff Wenger interview with W. S. MacDonald, March 1991.

13\. (U) Interviews with Waldron S. MacDonald. NARA RG457, SRH-355,
\"Naval Security Group History to World War II,\" 404.

14\. (U) Hagley Museum and library, Accession 1825, Honeywell
vSperry-Rand .Trial Records, Carton 67, William Radford, \"Report on An
Investigation ofthe Practicality of Developing a Rapid Computing
Machine,\" October 15, 1939, Appendix III, List of Numbered References.
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand ,
Trial Records, NCR Depositions, Bush to Deeds \"Analyzing Equipment,\"
May 19, 1938. Radford had been one ofthe \"boys\" at MIT who survived on
the 1930s version of \"soft money\" being a research assistant there
from 1932 to 1939. Caldwell put him to work on the Rapid Arithmetical
problem in early 1937. and he produced his report on \"The Practicality
of Developing a Rapid Calculating Machine,\" October 15, 1939.
Rockefeller Archives, Papers of Warren Weaver,





January 16, 1946, letter, S.H. Caldwell to Weaver, \"Center of
Analysis,\" 4.

15\. (U) The machine did not have a name until some years later. Who
borrowed the name Comparator from the nineteenth century MIT device
remains unknown.

16\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War
II,\" 208, 247

17\. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Bureau of Engineering, \"Plugboards for
Reproducing Punch,\" July 7,1936. NSA, Lou Holland, \"Development of
Machine Processing in the Naval Security Group,\" 9. Holtvvick had
created several small mechanical machines that cost less than \$300 each
for Japanese problems. The Bureau helped build them. NARA RG457,
SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War II,\" 210, 257,
261.

18\. (U) The patent claim was filed on April 22, 1937. William F.
Friedman and Vernon E. Whitman, Electric Control System for Tabulating
Cards, Documents and the like, U.S. Patent 2,224,646, December 10,1940.

19\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-274, \"Military Cryptanalysis.\" NARA SRH-004,
\"The Friedman Lectures on Cryptology.\"

20\. (U) David Kahn, Sewing the Enigma, (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1991),
87, and Cipher A. Deavours, \"The Black Chamber: A Column: LaMethode Des
Baton,\" Cryptologia, 4 (1980): 240-247. There are reports that the
Americans, including the Coast Guard group charged with attacking the
ciphers of the rumrunners, were able to break into the simple commercial
version of the Enigma during the 1920s. Malcolm F. Willoughby, Rum War
at Sea,(Washington: GPO, 1964).

21\. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma, (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin,
1991), 141.

22\. (U) W. S. MacDonald Interviews.

23\. (U) Letter to author from MIT registrar\'s office. In his first
interview, MacDonald stated that he went to MIT in June 1937. But in his
second interview he cited September as the month he began his duties. I
have accepted the second date because it makes more sense in light of
the previous pace of the work and MacDonald\'s desire to also enroll in
the graduate program in the department.

24\. (U) Paul F. Ceruzzi, Reckoners: The Prehistory of the Digital
Computer (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1983)

25\. (U) Michael R.Williams, A History of Computing Technology (Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1985). Nancy Stern, From ENIAC to UNIVAC:
An Appraisal of The Eckert-Mauchly Computers (Bedford, Mass.: Digital
Press, 1981).

26\. (U) Because the Comparator read ten data columns at a time, more
sophisticated IC tests could be done at the same rate as single letter
tallying. Bush and Wenger may not have realized the potentials of the
modified tabulators. The Comparator had five counters as did tabulators.
Thus, several fields could be processed in parallel. The navy may not
have analyzed all the (n\*(n-i)) combinations, but may have been
satisfied with only a portion of the possible offsets of the messages.

27\. (U) In some systems, messages were much, much longer. Thinking their
Fish system was beyond attack, the Germans sent very lengthy reports on
it. F. H.Hinsley etal., British Intelligence in the Second World War
Vol. Ill, 1 (London: Her Majesty\'s Stationery Office, 1984), Appendix
2,477.

28\. (U) Bush gave about one second for each line of printing. This time
was estimated via the description in the NSA RAM File, \"MAC, Outlines
\# 17, 70mm Comparator,\" and my knowledge of the 1938 Comparator.

29\. (U) Table 7.1 shows the power ofvarious devices, including the
Comparator (run at various projected speeds) relative to tabulators
operating at their typical 120 comparisons a minute. A cell entry in the
table gives the worth of the alternative machine in terms of the
hypothetical raw power of the number of tabulators. Thus, a sorter
running at full speed was worth three tabulators while the speed of a
typical teletype system of the era was five times greater than the
tabulators.

30\. (U) On tape speeds and densities, Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 2015, RemingtonRand, ERA materials, S. Ruebens,
\"Investigation of Solid Acoustic Delay Lines,\" Contract Nobs 28476,
August 1,1947, 1. The Colossus read at 5,000 characters a second. Brian
Randell (ed.), The Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers (New
York:

I\'UH bbUKbltitUMINDlKbL TO USA, AU3, CAM, ODR AND NHL//X1




Springer-Verlag, 1982), 349. It is not certain that this means that
5,000 serial characters passed the reading head of its tape scanner. The
Robinsons, the British versions of the tape-optical machines (but ones
for binary comparisons), read at 2,000 a second. Tape readers used by
the navy in WWII ran at about ten characters a second. The 1948 figure
is in Samuel S. Snyder, \"Abner: The ASA Computer, Part I: Design,\" NSA
Technical Journal 25 (1980), 59,

31\. (U) Avery important spinoff of the navy Comparator was a 1938
project at NCR. Desch used 35mm film with punched holes on an optical
comparing device for a utilities billing machine. Hagley Museum and
library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand Trial Records, August
16,1938, Desch to Williams, \"Laboratory work\" and August 30, 1939,
Desch to Williams \"Work at Laboratory.\"

32\. (U) Bernard Williams, \"Computing With Electricity, 1935-1945,\"
(Ph.D. Thesis, University of Kansas, 1984). Final OSRD Report, Div. 17,
George E. Beggs Jr. and F. L. Yust, \"Development and Application of
Electronic Counting Circuits,\" 1946, especially Chapter 9.

33\. (U) Several late 1930s projects at MIT explored magnetic memory and
many variations of storage based on electrical charges. See Hagley
Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand Trial
Records, Carton 67, William Radford \"Report on An Investigation of the
Practicality of Developing a Rapid Computing Machine, October 15,1939.\"

34\. (U) William Aspray (ed.), Computers Before Computing (Ames, la.:
Iowa State University Press, 1990).

35\. (U) Michael K. Buckland, \"Emanuel Goldberg, Electronic Document
Retrieval, and Vannevar Bush\'s Memex,\" JASIS 43 (1992): 284. On the
1937 and 1940 patents and their history, Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 2015, unprocessed ERA materials from Sperry Archive, November
1,1949, Memo to File, Selector Infringement Search, and Accession 1825,
Honeywell v Sperry-Rand Trial Records, August 13, 1937, Bush to Deeds,
and October 25, 1937, Research Corporation to Deeds.

36\. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Bureau of Engineering, \"Rapid
Equipment,\" March 29,1938.

37\. (U) A density often or eleven per inch was assumed as indicated by
the description of the later army version of 1944 which reached twelve
and onehalf per inch with an average over the entire tape of six and
one-quarter per inch. On the cost of the Eastman tape, NARA RG457,
SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War II,\" 276, and NSA
RAM File, CNO to Bureau of Engineering, April 29,1938.

38\. (U) In later models of the Comparator, the stepping could be from
one to ten characters after each pass. NSA RAM File, \"MAC. Outlines
\#17, 70mm Comparator,\" April, 1947.

39\. (U) Howard Aiken\'s early computer, the ASCC, used a tape rig
similar to the one chosen for the Comparator. During World War II the
Americans and the British also used a pulley and loop system for the
follow-ons to the Comparators, indicating that it was a sound method.
Michael R. Williams, A History of Computing Technology (Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1985), 245. Brian Randell, \"Colossus:
Grandfather of the Computer,\" in B. Randell (ed.), The Origins of
Digital Computers (New York: SpringerVerlag, 1982), 350.

40\. (U) Interviews with W. S. MacDonald.

41\. (U) Paul F. Ceruzzi, Reckoners: The Prehistory of the Digital
Computer (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1983). Charles S. Bashe,
etal, IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985), 36

39

42\. (U) Waldron MacDonald claimed he had to rework all the circuits and
that binary switching speeds did not exceed 5,000 per second. MacDonald
interviews, 1987-1991.

43\. (U) The navy\'s later Letterwriters and its Copperheads used a
modified baudot coding. NSA RAM File: \"Machine Comparisons,\" June
1946; Communications Intelligence Technical Paper 42, \"Copperhead I
Theory and Copperhead I Equipment\"; and Communications Intelligence
Paper 41, \"Copperhead I Punch and Copperhead I Scanner.\"

44\. (U) NSA RAM File, July 18, 1938, Safford to Bush, \"Machinery
Arrived.\"

45\. (U) NSA RAM File, Wenger Report, \"Bush Visit\" April 25, 1938.
Waldron S. MacDonald interviews. NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security
Group History to World War II,\" 299.




IUH SfcCKETOCOMINT/mCL TO USA, AU3, OAN, ODR AND N2U/X1

46\. (U) Interviews with Waldron S. MacDonald,

1987-1991.

47\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers ofVannevar Bush, Box 67, MacDonald
to Bush, July 25,1939. And interviews with MacDonald.

48\. (U) Office of Research and Inventions patent application sheet of
10-29-46 lists April 1938 as the time of the first successful witnessed
run. ONR, patent file for Bush Comparator, \#2,873,912.

49\. (U) NARA RG457\> SRH-355, \"Naval SecurityGroup History to World War
II,\" 272, 276. NSA RAM File, OF-20-G to Bureau of Engineering. \"Rapid
Equipment,\" April 29, 1938, and May 17, 1938, \"Comparator Equipment.\"

50\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-151, \"Military Study: Communication
Intelligence Research Activities,\" 022, indicates that the first Bush
machine was paid for out of a special fiscal 1938 allocation. The
proposed budget for 1939 contained a request for a similar amount, but
it may have been for a \"payback\" for the first expenditure.

51\. (U) NR4. RAM File, September 16, 1938, OP20-G Bureau of Ships,
\"Budget Request\"

52\. (U) The exact amounts spent and budgeted for the Comparator in 1938
and 1939 remain unknown. NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group
History to World War II,\" 276, 240. The budget request for fiscal 1939
included items for building new machines and new components such as a
rapid \"locator.\" This may have been a means of locating code groups, a
function later embodied in the machines designed by Lawrence Steinhardt,
or it may have been an automation of the methods of overlay sheets to
determine code-wheel orders and setting as used by Mrs. Driscoll. RAM
File, CNO to Bureau of Engineering, September 16, 1938, \"Development of
Special Communications Devices.\"

53\. (U) The machine arrived at the Navy Yard on June 24. It had been
badly jostled on the trip and refused to run. NSA RAM File, July
18,1938, OP-20-G to Bush \"Machine Has Arrived.\" It took Dulong some
three weeks to tease the machine into its first non-MIT test run. NRL,
Bush Comparator patent application file, October 29,1946,1.

54\. (U) NSA RAM File, July 18, 1938, Safford to Bush, \"Machinery
Arrived.\" NRL patent application file, October 29,1946,1.

55\. (U) NSA RAM File, May 17,1938, \"Comparator Equipment,\" and July
18, 1938, Safford to Bush, \"Machinery Arrived.\"

56\. (U) Jack Sweetman, American Naval History (Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 1984), 156.

57\. (U) Jeffery M. Dorwart, Conflict of Duty: The United States Navy\'s
Intelligence Dilemma 1919-1945 (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1983),
93, 99. NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Bureau of Engineering, March 22,1938
and June 24,1938, \"IBM Purchases.\" Cipher

A. Deavours, and Louis Kruh, Machine Cryptography and Modern
Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech House, 1985), 212. NSA, Theodore M.
Hannah, \"Frank

B. Rowiett; A Personal Profile,\" 116. Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, And
I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway - Breaking the Secrets (New York:
William Morrow, 1985). NARA RG457, SRMD 019, \"The Panay Incident.\"

58\. (U) NSA RAM File, May 17,1938, \"Comparator Equipment,\" and CNO to
Bureau of Engineering, September 16, 1938, \"Development of Special
Communications Devices.\"

59\. (U) Ironically, MIT would soon provide the army\'s cryptanalytic
group with an electrical engineer, Leo Rosen, who quickly became the
leader of the group that constructed a model of Purple and that became
the electronics research group in the SIS. NSA, Theodore M.Hannah,
\"Frank B. Rowiett: A Personal Profile,\" 18.

60\. (U) NSA RAM FUe, Safford to Bush, December 10,1938, \"Fine Job on
Comparator.\"

61\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355. \"Naval Security Group History to World War
II,\" 300.

62\. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G, \"List of statistical machinery,\"
December 1,1939.

63\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers ofVannevar Bush, Box 67, MacDonald
File, Bush to MacDonald \"OP-20-G Project,\" August 31, 1940. NARA
RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War II,\" 270,
405.

64\. (U) Daniel J. Kevies , The Physicists: The History of the Scientific
Community in Modern America (New York: Knopf, 1978), 296.




TOP OCOnCTOOOMINT/fnCL TO USA AUS, CAM, fiRP mri N7I HY1

65\. (U) Ronald W. Clark, Timrd (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1965).

66\. (U) Charles S.Bashe, etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1985), Chapter 2.

67\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand, Trial Records April 16, 1942, \"Conference on fire-control
projects.\" The ENIAC used a \"memory\" system from RCA that was quite
like what was used on some OP-20-G and SIS machines and a counting
circuit invented by one of RCA\'s men, Igor Grosdoff. N. Metropolis, et
al., (ed.), A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century (New York,
1980), 467. Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand , Trial Records, May 19, 1938, September 18, 1944. \"Army
seizes Grosdoff patent.\"

68\. (U) Bernard Williams, \"Computing With Electricity, 1935-1945,\"
(Ph.D. Thesis, University of Kansas, 1984), 317. Hagley Museum and
Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell vSpeiry-Rand Trial Records, June
6,1942, Weaver to participants \"Cancel fire control work.\"

69\. (U) The fear of defeat was quite real. Bletchley Park had scores of
buses at the ready to race its staff to port cities where they were to
board fast ocean liners for the United States and Canada.

70\. (U) Laurance F. Safford, \"Rhapsody in Purple,\" byDundas P.Tucker,
Cryptologia 6(1981): 196,220. NSA Theodore M.Hannah, \"Frank B.Rowlett:
A Personal Profile,\" 18. NSA RAM File, Part H of Report to J. N.
Wenger, Capt. USN, \"Resume of the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World
War II,\" (presumably a continuation of the Meade Report), 1. In
contrast to Safford\'s interpretation and on America\'s first contact
with British Enigma achievements, NARA RG457, SRH-361, \"History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic
Problems,\" 019-021, 272. NARA RG457, SRH-145, \"Report of the Technical
Mission to England,\" April 11, 1941, 002004. But on how little Enigma
ability OP-20-G had as late as the summer of 1943, NARA RG457, SRH-403,
\"Selections from the Cryptologic Papers of Rear Admiral J. N. Wenger,
USN,\" 072-3.

71\. (U) Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and
Midway -Breaking the Secrets (New York: William Morrow, 1985), 78.

72\. (U) NARA RG227, OSRD, Office of the Chairman, Box 1, Bush to
Safford, October 28, 1940, \"Project Agreement.\" NSA RAM File, Safford
to Radio Division, Bureau of Ships, November 2,1940, \"Bush Project.\"
NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War 11,\"
404.

73- (U) NSA RAM File, January 2,1942, Safford to Howard, \"Comparator
Received 12-24,\" and January 6,1942, BuShips to CNO, \"Manual for
Comparator.\"

74\. (U) Again, this may also have been a means of automating the use of
the sheets used to attack wheel settings.

75\. (U) The punches were redesigned and remanufactured several times
during the war. After MIT made a try in 1940-41, the Gray manufacturing
company made a version; then NCR redid them; then new designs were drawn
for the postwar era. NSA RAM File, Communications Intelligence Technical
Paper42, \"Copperhead I Theory and Copperhead I Equipment.\" NSA RAM
File, 0P-20-G to NCML-NCR, February, 1945.

76\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War
II,\" 430. On Steinhardt visit, Smithsonian Institution, History
ofComputers Project, Interview with Howard Campaigne, 19.

77\. (U) Some \$25,000 was promised to NCR in November 1940. Some of it
may have come from the original NDRC grant, but Bush apparently secured
an additional grant for some thirty copies of the counters although the
NDRC was not to become involved in production. NARA Suitland, OSRD
Contract Files, OEM 275 November 28, 1941, \"NCR-MIT counters.\" Hagley
Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand , Trial
Records, December 2,1941, NDRC D3 to Desch-NCR, \"30 counter printers.\"

78\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand , Trial Records, January 29, 1942, Desch to NCR \"Secret
Work,\" and February 21,1942, Desch, \"Report to Management.\"

79\. (U) Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story: Breaking the Enigma Codes
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982). David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston:





Houghton-Mifflin, 1991). The role of captures in the long-awaited break
into Japanese army systems is discussed in the very impressive Edward J.
Drea, MacArthur\'s Ultra (University of Kansas Press, 1992).

80\. (U) On the state of American readiness and some hints about the
roles of Mrs. Driscoll and the team at SIS, compare James Rusbridger and
Eric Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York: Summit Books, 1991), and
the more scholarly Edward J. Drea, MacArthur\'s Ultra (University of
Kansas Press, 1992). NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History
to World War II,\" 440, 442. NSA RAM File, OP-20-G toOP-20-A, \"Meeting
with Dr. Howard,\" November 5,1941. However, Howard was told that the
Driscoll problem was not of high priority. NSA RAM File, BuShips to
Howard, November 11,1941.

81\. (U) NSA RAM File, November 3 and 5,1941, Howard OP-20-G Reports on
Meetings, and November 14,1941, Bureau of Ships to Howard.

82\. (TS//SI) MAC. Outlines \#1, April 1947, Electroanagrammer (\"Gee
Whizzer\"), stored inCCH Series XII Z. Leroy Wheatley, \"Brief
Description of Analytic Equipment, Fourth Installment,\" 20 September
1954, \"NC MACHINES,\" stored inCCH Series XII Z.

83\. (TS//SI//REL) Samuel S.Snyder, \"Famous First Facts: Part I:
Pre-Computer Machine Cryptanalysis,\" unpublished, stored in CCH Series
XII Z. \"Gee Whizzer,\" circa 1947, stored in CCH Series XII Z.

84\. (U) S.Snyder Interview with Lou Holland, circa February 2,1972,
stored in CCH XIK, Box \#10, Famous First Fact folder. Wheatley, \"Brief
Description of Analytic Machines, Fourth Edition,\" 20 September 1954,
\"NC Machines.\"

85\. (U) NSA S 337/348 \"Additive MachinesHistorical Summary Of,\" Stored
in CCH Series XII Z. The first M4was operational at the end of 1941. It
worked well for a time, but had to be replaced.

86\. (U) Photographic plates for data entry had been used on the Cinema
Integraph and were being explored for use in the Analyser and the
electronic computer at the Institute. NSA RAM File, January 5, 1942,
Howard toOP-20-G, \"Report: Glass Plates.\" Arnold Dumey letters to
Brian Randell, 1975, \"deformation.\"

87\. (U) NARA RG457: SRH-279, \"0P-20-G File Communications Intelligence
Organization, 1942-46:\" SRMN-084, \"The Evolution of the Navy\'s
Cryptologic Organization,\" 2; and SRH-306 \"OP-20-G Exploits and
Commendations World War II.\"

88\. (U) Interview with Jeff Wenger, 1991.

89\. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-083, \"Military Study of Secret Radio Calls,
January 1938.\"

90\. (U) All other major nations used the same techniques and had done so
since World War I, but Wenger was America\'s advocate. NARA RG457,
SRMN-083, \"Military Study of Secret Radio Calls, January 1938.\"

91\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-083, \"Military Study of Secret Radio Calls,
January 8,1938 by J. N. Wenger.\"

92\. (U) On automatic direction finding equipment. NARA SRH-197, \"US
Navy Communications Intelligence, Organization, Liaison and
Collaboration 1941-1945,\" 38.

93\. (U) Some reports indicate that in late 1941 the vast majority of the
\"G\" workforce was busy with T/A rather than cryptanalysis. NARA RG457,
SRH-403, \"Selections from the Cryptologic Papers of Rear Admiral J. N.
Wenger, USN.\"

94\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-279 \"OP-20-G, Communication Intelligence
Organization 19421946.\"

95- (U) NARA RG457, SRH-305, \"The Undeclared War: The History ofRI,\"
15 November 1943, by Laurance F. Safford, Captain, U. S. Navy.

96\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-403, \"Selections from the Cryptologic Papers of
Rear Admiral J. N. Wenger, USN,\" 60. BuShips, NXS329 (945) 5-6-43,
Pulse Spotter Equipment, Philco Corporation. The remainder of the war.
Library of Congress, Papers of Vannevar Bush, Box 52, Howard to Killian,
March 21, 1946, \"rapid selector.\"








