Chapter 5 (U) A Search for Other \"Bombes\"

\(U) The arrival of the United States Navy\'s Bombes in Washington in
autumn 1943 allowed OP-20-GM to turn its attention to Japan. It also
gave some of its men time to think of advancing beyond electromechanics.
But the tenuous control over the Enigma systems and the challenges of
the very stubborn Japanese codes and ciphers meant that electromechanics
and the Bombes continued to demand much of the energies of the
Americans.

\(U) OP-20-GM explored many electronic and photo-optical possibilities
during the last two years of the war as it attempted to conquer Japan\'s
systems, and as it responded to Britain\'s cries for help to fight
changes in Germany\'s codes and ciphers. In a few instances \"M\" was
able to go beyond the technology of the Bombes, but in most cases it had
to relegate electronics and advanced film-based processing to small
exploratory projects. Only when there was a combination of an
inescapable demand for ultra-high speeds and a possibility of coaxing
electronics into behaving would \"G\" allow its engineers to try to turn
their electronic dreams into hardware.

\(U) The army\'s SIS also had to drop its ambitious early plans for
advanced electronic devices. Like the navy\'s cryptanalysts, its men had
to turn to quick and rather clumsy solutions during the first years of
the war.

\(U) Meanwhile, the Army

\(U) In late 1942, while OP-20-G\'s cryptanalysts were establishing their
place in European communications intelligence, the American army\'s
codebreakers struggled to gain just a foothold. Unlike the navy, the
army was not involved in European-related action until well

after the outbreak of the war. It had a more difficult time than the
navy in intercepting enemy messages, and the British were much less in
need of its cooperation. 1

(T0//0I) The British had begun to share their knowledge of German and
Italian diplomatic traffic before the war, but they were more than
reluctant to allow the American army a role in the German army and air
force systems.2 At first, the Signal Corps and the SIS were not worried
about their inability to read the German military traffic. Just before
Pearl Harbor they indicated they were not interested in working on the
army and air force problems. But when troops were committed to North
Africa, attitudes changed dramatically. The Americans realized the
shortcomings of depending on intelligence supplied by another nation.
The SIS wanted its own control over Enigma, but it had few
capabilities. 3

\(U) Founded to replace Herbert Yardley\'s infamous Black Chamber in the
late 1920s, the army\'s Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) began with
what Joseph Wenger yearned for, a core of young and talented civilian
mathematicians. Under William F. Friedman they became respected for
their use of statistical methods.4 Much of their time and expertise was
devoted to creating codes and ciphers for the army. But they devoted an
increasing amount of effort to operational cryptanalysis.

\(U) Although separate from OP-20-G, the SIS had a gentlemen\'s agreement
about cryptanalytic turf. Friedman\'s group agreed to focus on enemy
army systems but to share a rather ill-defined zone of diplomatic and
clandestine traffic with \"G.\" The Coast Guard\'s cryptanalytic office,
led by Friedman\'s wife, and the FBI\'s codebreaking





group shared in tapping the diplomatic and clandestine traffic in the
Americas. Like OP-20-G\'s crew during the 1930s, the SIS\'s men were
directed to concentrate on Japan\'s secret systems but not given the
resources to fulfill the charge.

\(U) The difficulty of intercepting enough military messages extended to
the SIS\'s attack on Japan\'s army systems. Unlike the use of
highpowered radio by the navies, the armies and air forces of the world
used low-power systems and sent relatively few messages that could be
intercepted from a great distance. Even after the SIS constructed
listening posts in the Pacific and the Canal Zone,5 it could not acquire
military messages in enough \"depth\" for code or cipher breaking. 6

\(U) As a result, Friedman\'s talented men and women spent much of their
time during the 1930s on diplomatic communications. After months of
intense work, in 1940 they laid the foundation for America\'s Magic by
successfully attacking Japan\'s new Purple enciphering machine system.
It carried Japan\'s most important diplomatic messages to and from the
world capitals. Although Friedman\'s group received help from the navy
in attacking Purple, Magic was seen as an SIS triumph by the nation\'s
leadership.

\(U) Friedman\'s group had employed modern as well as traditional
cryptanalytic techniques against Purple. A few years after OP-20-G began
to use tabulating machines, the SIS established its first automation
foothold.7 Although it did not begin an OP-20-G-like Rapid Machine
project before the war, the SIS hired a newly minted MIT electrical
engineer at a critical stage in the Japanese diplomatic problem. That
graduate of MITs electrical engineering department, Leo Rosen, helped
break into the Japanese diplomatic machine and constructed its first
analog. 8

\(U) Although William F. Friedman\'s group had ideas for teletype-tape
comparators, isomorph machines, and relay attachments for tabu

lators, it did not have the resources to turn them into hardware. It did
not go beyond building direct analogs of enemy machines.

\(U) The Search for Another American Ultra

\(U) When war broke out, the SIS had little cryptanalytic capability, few
intercepts, and little machinery. It had no Enigma proficiency, it was
unable to read the major Japanese or German military codes, and it had
few messages or machines with which to analyze them. In fact, it
appeared that it would be some time before the SIS would have much to
work on.

\(U) It did get one assignment but through default. \"G\" was overworked
because of its efforts against critical German and Japanese naval
systems. Out of necessity, it turned all of the Japanese diplomatic
problem over to the SIS.9 That Purple diplomatic challenge took much of
the army\'s attention in the first year of the war, although the system
had already been solved. Purple had become a relatively easy system to
exploit. It needed a few new electromechanical analogs, but it demanded
little else. Even Britain cooperated. It sent intercepts and
cryptanalytic advice to Friedman\'s Japanese experts. The attention was
well rewarded. Much was learned about Germany, as well as Japan, from
the radio and cable messages to and from Japan\'s embassies in Axis and
neutral nations.

\(U) The German problems were very different. Its diplomatic systems
proved difficult to enter, and its military codes and ciphers resisted
attack. As important, the British, who held many secrets to entering
Enigma and other German ciphers, did not wish to grant the SIS power
over Germany\'s army or air force systems.

\(U) The SIS badly needed Britain\'s help. It began World War II with as
little, perhaps less, potential to enter German systems as OP-20-G. When
the SIS finally decided to establish an Enigma program and demanded to
become a





partner in Ultra, it found that it had little to negotiate with. Its
main bargaining chips, Purple and Magic, had been given away in early
1941. 10

\(U) The SIS had a much more difficult time than OP-20-G in gaining
GC&CS\'s trust. Throughout the war the SIS men felt they had to fight
much harder than the navy for British concessions on Ultra.\" They
worried that the British promises of full cooperation that had been made
as early as the autumn of 1940 might never be kept. In a way, their
fears were correct. GC&CS never granted the United States Army\'s
cryptanalysts as much independence as it did the navy\'s men.

\(U) And while playing atug-of-war with Britain to gain knowledge of the
German ciphers, the SIS was tormented by the Japanese army code problem.
It was not until the spring of 1943 that the SIS centers in Washington
and Australia were able to tap a major army system.12 Perhaps it was the
need to devote its energies to the Japanese codes, and a belief that
traditional methods were the only alternative for such problems, that
led the SIS to be much later than the navy in establishing a formal
group to develop rapid machines for statistical and mathematical
cryptanalysis.

\(U) Its delayed start led the SIS to rely on the navy to supply most of
its initial RAM equipment. But it then launched perhaps an overly
ambitious attempt to create a very advanced RAM, one that, it was hoped,
would leap-frog the navy\'s technology

\(U) A Great Electronic Adventure, the Freak

(TO//0I) Like the ex-MIT engineers at OP-20G, some of the SIS\'s
technicians had great faith in advanced electronics. Their first dream
at the outbreak of the war was for a new type of machine to perform one
of the most tedious but important general cryptanalytic functions,
frequency counting. Their goal was to create a relatively small and

super-fast machine to count and record all simple and digraphic
frequencies. The machine was to do that in one pass through a message.
Tabulators, because they had so few counters, demanded much sorting and
many card runs to complete a full count. Many of the standard tabulator
frequency-counting procedures used in the attacks against Purple,
Hagelin and, later, some teletype systems took sixty to ninety hours. 13

\(U) To go beyond the \"tabs\" for such complex counting was a challenge.
For one thing, it called for the creation of a new type of memory.
Readily available technological options, such as using industrial
counters to store results, meant accepting slow processing and a machine
that would be the size of a room. 14

(TS//SI) In mid-1942 Leo Rosen decided to take up that challenge.
Recently put in charge of a group of engineers, he decided to establish
an SIS RAM program. He thought that it should begin with fundamental
contributions. He was determined to develop a large high-speed
electronic memory. In addition, he told his men to create electronic
circuits that could perform analytic

\(U) Leo Rosen





functions, such as a sigmage test, that were an integral part of all the
frequency-based cryptoattacks.15 Together, he hoped they would provide
the basis for the high-speed counting machine, Freak, a device that
OP-20-G seemed unwilling to produce.

(TS//8I) Unfortunately, Rosen picked a much too ambitious goal for the
army\'s first RAM adventure. It took a year and a half before Freak I
emerged from the SIS workshop; then, it proved too delicate for
operational work.


\(U) Freak

(T0//0I) Freak\'s design and components were major advances in the
technology of calculation. Rosen\'s group had decided to use more than
7,000 condensers for the machine\'s mass \"memory.\" One thousand
twenty-four sets of seven condensers each were the \"counters\" in
Freak. \'6 By using the binary counting system, every set could hold a
count of up to ninety-nine. The enormous number of condensers accounted
for much of the

size of Freak I. The machine was nine feet high by eight feet long.1?

(TS//6I) There were great hopes that Freak would speed all types of
counting and analysis. As the data were read in from two tape readers
and processed through a relay system, the appropriate counters were
incremented. Then the advanced electronic digital circuits calculated
running frequencies and the critical SUM (N(Ni)/2). The circuits also
scanned the counters and controlled an electromatic typewriter which
printed the results.

GSyyef) The use of the binary system, the memory technology, and the
digital calculations were advanced for the time.18 Freak I,
unfortunately, did not have along or useful life. The counters proved
unreliable, and the electronic circuitry was troublesome. The machine
was so uncooperative that it was dismantled in mid-1944, just six months
after its birth. 19

£¥9} The defeat on the first Freak tempered the SIS\'s faith in
electronics, but its engineers decided to try again. They constructed a
second version that began twenty operations in spring 1945. It proved
more reliable than its predecessor.\"°

\(U) Tabulators and Traffic: A Data Processing War

\(U) Despite the affection for electronics, the SIS placed its faith in
older technologies during the first critical months of the war. The SIS
made an agreement with IBM and soon had scores of tabulating machines.
Many IBM engineers were


TnrMCBBaco T\"\"CI Tniirfl fl\"r r\"\" rnn \>Mn u7i,m



sent to Washington to make significant modifications to the tabs and
sorters, and IBM\'s factories were kept busy producing special devices.
By the end of war, the SIS had close to 400 IBM machines using a million
IBM cards a day.

(T3//CIj- The workforce for the machines grew from fewer than 100 at the
end of 1942 to 600 a year later. By the end of the war the SIS\'s tab
rooms had close to 1,200 workers. 21

0EB//SI)\'As the SIS waited for intercepts from the Japanese military
systems and hoped for information from the British on the Enigma, they
did their best to produce intelligence from the few sources besides
Purple that were available to the agency. 22

CIS//0F) One ofthose sources was the intercepts of diplomatic messages
sent on Germany\'s GEC system. The army\'s radio men had been collecting
them on their own for some time, as well as receiving information on
them from the British. But collecting was easier than solving the
system. The GEC codes were tough. The Germans used code words doubly
enciphered with additives.

(T9//9\"I) The tabulator group at SIS began an attack on the system
using labor-intensive techniques similar to those the navy had developed
to breach the Japanese navy\'s additive systems. The going was
difficult, however. The usual attacks did not seem to work. The Germans
had a very clever keyword system for specifying the additives that
proved difficult for the Americans to penetrate during their first year
of IBM attacks. Fortunately, the British had acquired some pages of
additives from a French agent and decided to pass them to the Americans
in early 1942.

(TO/SI) With the hints about the system, the Americans launched their
first new tabulator attack of the war. Their work on GEC led them to
develop machine methods, such as the search for double repeats, that
were transferred to the

Japanese military problems once a flow of intercepts began. 23

gS//8Jj But the SIS had to wait quite some time before the army could
supply enough Japanese material. Then the SIS cryptanalysts found that
Japan\'s military had, perhaps unwittingly, been wiser than its
diplomats. Japan\'s diplomats had made a mistake by basing their secret
communications system on a machine. By turning to the latest technology,
they had made their ciphers more vulnerable than if they had used, for
example, crude one-time pads.

£K)/0fl In contrast, the Japanese military had decided to stay with
older methods. In doing so, they frustrated the British and American
codebreakers and forced them to turn to very \"data heavy\" methods. The
Japanese army\'s code-withadditive systems were vulnerable to capture,
but neither the Americans nor the British acquired any significant
amounts ofmaterial during the first years of the war.

QCS//8I) A cryptanalytic attack without captures, or quite evident
\"busts,\" demanded enormous numbers of intercepts, analysts, and
machines. It meant that the SIS had to engage in a frustrating data
processing war.

(TS//SI) Despite the allocation of massive amounts of resources to the
problem, the Japanese army\'s systems resisted longer than its navy\'s.
The difficulty of intercepting its messages, its use of complex additive
systems, and its clever ways of hiding the information contained in the
message preambles led to a near cryptanalytic blackout during 1942 and
1943.

CDS//SI) The inability of the Allies to read the major army systems
through cryptanalysis led the SIS to rely upon traffic \^is; ia
consequence, IBM tabulators and methods quite like those in business
data processing became essential to its operations.24 Throughout the war
hundreds of machines and people were kept busy




TI1P .W.Mim-n Turin Tn m\^., ,\^\|rr \^ nnn A,\|n \^\^

sorting, counting, and listing frequencies of communications among
units. Even when some of the major army systems had been penetrated, 20
percent of the total machine hours in SIS were devoted just to the
analysis of the message headings.

CTO//0I) Keypunching and the physical maintenance of card files for the
traffic analysis processing were demanding by themselves. Recording and
analyzing 300,000 messages a month for traffic analysis was not
uncommon. Huge decks of cards had to be carefully loaded into the tabs
and sorters for the first of the many steps in each analysis routine,
then reloaded several times to complete a process. The pressures all
that created were so great that the SIS Machine Branch had to endure a
critical personnel problem: after several weeks oftraining, machine
operators quit. The young civilian women were apologetic, but insisted
they be allowed to leave. The night shifts were especially difficult to
staff, and it was only the arrival ofWACS, who were allowed to live on
base and who were unable to resign, that allowed the machine room to
continue its twenty-four-hour work day. 25

\(V) Making the Tabs More Powerful

£58-) The IBM tabulators remained the foundation of the SIS\'s operation
and for more than traffic analysis. The continued dependency on the tabs
was reflected in the intense efforts the SIS made to increase their
power. By the end of the war, the Arlington Hall engineers had helped to
develop an impressive array of specialized IBM equipment as well as a
whole series of complex relay attachments. \*\*

ffS//3\'f)\' Modified \"tabs\" were the technology for the SIS\'s work
on Japanese code problems. Some twenty-three different relay attachments
were used to attack Japanese army systems. In many instances, the
attachments were so powerful that the \"tabs\" were relegated to being
mere input-output devices serving the relay cabinets.

(TS//SI) The complex relay circuits placed on the tabs automatically
stripped additives, applied possible encryption squares, and even
searched to see if the results of additive removal had led to the
appearance of high-frequency code groups. The more complex attachments
received names, such as Brute Force, Camel, JMA, the Selective Square,
or the Limited Selector.

(T9//3I) The modifications that automatically decoded upwards of 2,500
messages a day were of special pride to the SIS\'s machine branch. They
allowed the timely exploitation of the captures of cipher text and key
that began to flow into Arlington Hall during 1944.2?

fFS//SI) One of the most impressive of the SIS\'s tabulator
modifications was the Slide Run machine. Tts origins illustrate why most
of America\'s codebreaking history is so unlike the thrilling story of
MAGIC, when a brilliant insight supposedly led to a near instant victory
over a major communications system

28

\(U) Slides, Runs, and Endless Decks of Cards

(T0//0I) The mature Slide Run machine of mid-1944 was a combination of a
405 Tabulator and a huge chest-high, multipanel cabinet full of advanced
relay circuits, telephone crossbar relays, counters, and plugboards. But
the Slide Run did not begin as an elegant example of IBM\'s best work.
The. first two of the devices were hurriedly built by the \"F\" Branch
in late 1943 as an emergency response to the requests of the
cryptanalysts. The \"cryppies\" thought they might have found the
techniques and some of the additive keys needed to attack the Japanese
army systems.

CTO//31) Although hastily built to exploit a particular opportunity, the
machines proved so valuable that a development and production contract
was signed with IBM. The new Slide Runs were to be used on a variety of
problems. By early 1944, IBM was constructing six more Slide Run





machines, each more sophisticated than its predecessor. \^

(TS//SI) The Slide Run machines were badly needed because of the
continuing difficulties with Japanese army systems. The Japanese army
problem was very difficult and all attacks were extremely labor
intensive. Hundreds of cryptanalysts at SIS had been working since the
beginning of the war to discover the numeric additives and the codegroup
meanings. The tabulators had been called upon to process files of as
many as 3,000,000 cards.

(T8//9I) Copperhead-like brute force searches, keyword searches, and
repetitive additive stripping and testing kept machine-room double
shifts busy for months. Despite all the effort, there was little more
than frustration until April 1943 when the Japanese army\'s indicator
system was broken. That allowed the identification ofthe enciphering
squares that were used in the indicators. With that breakthrough, it was
possible to identify messages that were enciphered using the same
additive pages. With knowledge of the pages, an attempt could be made to
place messages on overlaps by tabulator-based, brute-force searches.

(TS//SI) At first the search for the repeat of the same cipher groups at
the same intervals in two messages (brute force) had to be done through
the tedious repetition of card duplication and endless sorting.The most
efficient attacks still demanded files of almost 200,000 IBM cards. All
that processing was tolerated just to try to find messages that had a
probability of being enciphered with the same set of additives. The job
became too much, even for the SIS\'s hundreds of tabulators and sorters.
Away to automate the. process had to be found

QXS//&B In response to the need, a relay attachment was built for the
brute-force search; but the Japanese army attack continued to demand
round after round of card punching,

reproduction, collating, sorting, addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and printing. For example, one procedure developed in the summer of 1943
hoped to recover additives by using four copies of a file of 430,000
cards. The files were run three shifts a day until the end of the year.

(TS//SI) By fall 1943 the many tabulator attacks and an increasing
number of captures of Japanese material allowed the accumulation of a
file of additives. The next logical steps were to try to locate the
messages that used particular additives and to strip the additives to
reveal clear numeric codes. From there, the cryptanalyst could recover
more code meanings and decipher more messages.

(-E9//STJ The automation of the process came gradually. At first, the
\"slide run\" procedure was just a new way to use the existing tabs. It
was developed to replace the old hand methods of applying a known
additive to a length of code, then testing to see if a sensible result
emerged. If an unlikely group appeared after the additive had been
removed, the additive was tried against the next offset of the text. If
a juxtaposition of additive and cipher yielded a likeiy result, it was
tested against a file of frequently used code groups. When a match
occurred, the cryptanalysts concluded that it was probable that the
additive they were trying might have been used to encipher the current
message.

(TS\^tfI\>The \"slide\" was a common sense but powerful technique. But
even when it was implemented in IBM methods, it stretched human as well
as machine resources. When regular tabulator equipment was used, the
routine was quite complex. A series of five likely keys (additives) was
punched on cards so that they could be tested against all possible
positions in thousands of messages. When the key produced, in two of the
five tested positions, code groups found among the already known most
frequent 250, the tabulator printed the message number and the five code
groups.






CID//QI ) Slide Run

(T3//3D What came to be called the Slide Run machine was developed to
reduce the size and number of required card files and to speed the
\"slide\" testing process. The first step towards the eventually very
sophisticated device was the invention of a code-recognition component.
To further automate the process and to reduce the number of cards that
had to be handled, aeonversion unit was constructed. Its relay circuits
stripped the additives to produce the code sent to the recognition unit.

if it completed any of the code circuits. If it did, the machine
recorded a \"hit.\"30

(TS//S\*) More and more \"intelligence\" was built into the Slide Run
machines. New models appeared which included sensitive and labor-saving
statistical threshold tests. They prevented the printing of unprofitable
reports. The first of the postwar versions went further. It used a
logweighting method to reduce the number of \"prints.\"31

(TS//SI) In the Slide Run machine, banks of relays were wired to hold as
many as 250 code groups; later versions held as many as 1,500. The
recognition unit tested each stripped group coming from the tabulator\'s
arithmetic section to see

(TS//SI) The Slide Runs were of great value to SIS, but they were not
exceptionally fast nor easily \"programmed.\" The best of the World War
II versions read cards at a rate of 150 a minute, and it took from three
to five days of work to set the





codes in the recognition units. Then it took hours to run the cards for
a series of messages. 32

(TS//SI) The impossibility of increasing the rate of card-sensing much
beyond what had been accomplished by 1944 is what led the SIS, in June
1945, to make a request for a RAM 70mm film version of the three \"tab\"
machines that had proven so useful against the Japanese systems: the
Slide Run, the Isomorph, and the Brute Force machines. Unfortunately for
the men within Leo Rosen\'s section who, as we will see, became the
torchbearers for Bush\'s ideas, the army decided the Eastman designs
should not be funded. 33

\(U) The Other Bombe Program

\(U) Well before any progress had been made on the Japanese military
problems, the SIS decided that it had to gain a share of the European
Ultra. And like the navy, it wanted control over its own intelligence
resources. But it was ill prepared in terms of skills, equipment, or
political power

(TS//SI) The SIS did not begin its Enigma battle technologically
prepared, nor did it have any plans for advanced anti-Enigma machines.
At the beginning of the war, the SIS\'s men were told of OP-20-G\'s RAM
contracts with Eastman and Gray. As a result, Rosen and Friedman became
interested in the possibilities of microfilm-based machines, and they
agreed to at least examine their possibilities. Soon, they heard a few
things about the navy\'s Bombe ambitions. 34

ffiG//3YT But during the first months of 1942 the SIS focused on
expanding its tabulator section; it was not until late in the year that
it decided to create a machine research group that had the manpower
needed to examine, let alone create, new technologies. The MIT graduate,
Leo Rosen, was placed at the head of a small team that began its work in
the basement of an old house at Arlington Hall Station.35 One of his
first actions was to advise his superiors that the SIS should join in
the RAM program. He convinced the army

to purchase almost \$200,000 worth of copies of the OP-20-G-sponsored
machines from Eastman and Gray.36 The army gave the Bureau of Ships the
funds needed to purchase machines similar to Tessie, the IC machines,
and, later, a Gray-NCR Comparator. Letterwriters were also supplied by
the navy. As within \"G,\" they became an essential part of SIS\'s data
processing services.

\(U) Another Step Back

dSS//8f) Rosen\'s major assignment, however, was to produce a machine to
give SIS the kind of power the army thought OP-20-G was gaining over
GC&CS through its emerging Bombe program. By summer 1942 he gained
approval for an SIS Bombe program. He began to assemble a force of
enlisted engineers and technicians but soon realized that the army would
be unable to build or even design a Bombe by itself.38 His staff
remained too small through 1942, and he had to confine its work to
preliminary investigations and minimal construction projects.

\(U) One of the first of its preliminary studies was on the possibility
of a new type of Bombe for the army and air force Enigma problems; that
turned out to be a major task. Soon Rosen thought enough had been
learned to allow a commitment. In October 1942 the SIS decided it had to
have its own version of a Bombe, and it was to be acquired independently
of Britain and OP-20G. 39

■(0) Rosen\'s \"F\" team explored an electronic Enigma while Friedman
made the rounds of the scientists associated with the NDRC\'s fire
control computers.40 Rosen\'s electronic option would be put aside for
the same reasons OP-20-G had dropped electronics during the summer. But
the SIS\'s hope for a tube-based solution lasted a bit longer. 41

(TS//SI) Belief in the potential of electronics led to Rosen\'s team
hiring experts from the telephone company. They worked on an electronic






AS//3I ) Madame X

Bombe until December 1943. Then frustration with the disappointing
results led to an end of the contract. However, SIS\'s faith bounced
back, and it began the hunt for another high-speed rotor after its \"E\"
crisis had passed. 42

\(U) While Rosen and the Western Electric experts explored electronics,
one of the alternatives recommended by the NDRC\'s researchers was
approved. What became known as Madame X followed the general logic of
the Turing attack on the Enigma, but it was significantly different from
the British and the OP-20-G Bombes. The machine first appeared as a
breadboard demonstration unit in early 1943, passed its first tests that
summer, and was available as an operational model in October 1943. 43

(8//SI) Madame X(also called \"003\") was huge. It was so large because
the SIS had decided to be more elegant and innovative than the navy. It
wanted one grand Enigma-fighting machine, 300 uncoordinated ones.
Although it did not meet all its original goals, the \"003\" was an
impressive machine.44 It contained 144 Enigma scrambler units, as
compared to the sixteen in the standard OP-20-G Bombe. \"003\'s\" banks
could be divided into different size groups so that as many as twelve
useful menus could be run at one

time.45 The army cryptanalysts knew that the longer a crib and its
chains, the fewer the false hits. A large number of units linked through
a flexible central control system would allow several shorter cribs to
be run simultaneously. 46

(TO//OI) The \"003\" was designed for more than simultaneous runs,
however. It was intended to be easier to use than the navy Bombe and to
have a much faster setup time. Some of those goals were achieved. When
the \"003\" was completed, the army\'s technicians sat in a \"turret\"
room and set plugs and switches on small control boards rather than
having to place dozens of commutators on the machine as the navy\'s
operators had to.

(T3//3I) The \"turret\" system was quite innovative. There were a dozen
of the switching stations in the room. Each \"turret\" was a small
version of a telephone switchboard with an addition, a set of push
buttons. Each board could control its own part of the \"003\" if
simultaneous runs were desired. Such simultaneous use seems to have been
the norm once the SIS learned that wellselected short menus could be
powerful. Strong menus sent from England allowed the use of only a few
of the \"E\" units (perhaps fourteen) per test. Typically, some ten
problems were run atone




IUP Sl:UKfcl//CUMINI)JKhL IU USA, AU3, (IAN, OOR AND NIEL//X1

time. On its best days, \"003\" completed 1,200 of the short three-wheel
runs.\"47

ffi3//SJQ-The switchboards were used to select which subset of the
frames were to be active during a run. The push buttons were truly a
unique and potentially valuable feature. Through them wheel orders could
be changed in one-half a second. That allowed wheel orders to be tested
in rapid succession. Unfortunately, the other parts of the setup,
including the menu, had to be done by hand on the individual Enigma
frames. That led to the setup time for the \"003\" being much more than
hoped for - some twenty minutes for a test when more than wheel orders
had to be changed. At peak efficiency, a crew could place and run twelve
new menus a day.\*8

\(U) Avery innovative and important feature of the \"003\" was its
ability to automatically control the stepping motion of its \"wheel\"
analog. The relay circuits allowed the machine to use \"non-metric\"
motion. 49

\(U) More to It Than the Madame

f&) Like the navy\'s Bombe, Madame X could not work alone. Before it
could be efficiently used, the SIS had to have cribs and a list of what
wheel orders would not have to be tested. Then, after a \"hit\" was
found, the SIS had to do as much or more hand-testing than the navy.
Several machines to speed the hand work were built. They performed the
same type of functions as the navy\'s M8 and M9.

(TS/filj The army needed a special aid to help \"003\" because of what
might be called a design oversight in late 1942. The design of Madame X
had begun before the SIS knew all about the British Enigma attacks and
before it had enough experience to realize how necessary it was to have
machines that eliminated all but a very, very few possible keys and
settings. Thus, the original Madame X did not have a full \"diagonal
board\" test built into it.

(TO//SI) SIS\'s men thought their bombe would be useful even though its
list of \"stops\" would not be filtered by a thorough test for stecker
inconsistencies as was found on the British Jumbo Bombe. As a result,
they thought that a celluloid grille would be sufficient to search for
\"contradictions.\"

(T0//SF) That was incorrect. That hand \"diagonal board\" test proved so
time-consuming that the first of the SIS\'s versions of grenades was
constructed.50 But as more was learned about the navy\'s and GC&CS\'s
machines, Rosen\'s team decided to build an attachment that would
automate the entire consistency-checking process. 51

(TS//SI) The American Machine Gun had its first tests in September 1943,
a month before the second half of \"003\" was completed. Built of the
same technology as its host, the Machine Gun searched for stecker
inconsistencies and suppressed all the \"stops\" that were logically
impossible given the nature of the Enigma plugboard. The \"Gun\" speeded
SIS\'s work but caused some discomfort for those assigned to \"003\'s\"
rooms. It was a very noisy device, as was what had inspired it,
Britain\'s older grenade. 52

tSkSome other special devices were attached to the original \"003.\"
like many of the navy\'s grenades, the army\'s add-ons took advantage,
whenever possible, of German procedural errors. But some of the
attachments and alterations were designed to apply new general
cryptanalytic knowledge to speed \"003\" processing. 53

ggi//SI) Many of the ideas for the new attachments came from the
British, who were creating similar devices for their Bombes. Their CSKO
switch, for example, had been very helpful. Once on \"003,\" it helped
exploit a German air force procedural rule forbidding linking any
checkerboard letter to its neighbor. For example, B could not be
checkered to A orC. The Consecutive Stecker Knockout circuits checked
for such illegal





connections and prevented a \"stop\" from being indicated. 54

(TS//SI) Madame X was given another helpful attachment, the Double
Input. It was an application of more sophisticated knowledge of the
probability aspects of cribbing. This allowed two relatively weak menus
to be run simultaneously and to approach the power of the usual
sixteenletter menu with \"closure\" on the crib-plain combinations. 55

0TO//OI) Alterations to \"003\" allowed it to drag cribs so that it
could am Swiss and Spanish Enigma problems. And the Clambake attachments
were for short runs for \"grenade cribs.\" The \"003\" was allowed to
perform more flexible tests by using the Oyster Schuker attachment. In
addition, methods to exploit Cillys were developed, and \"003\" was, at
times, rewired to handle special Enigma reflector runs. 56

4&)r There were several attempts to make Madame X more powerful; some
were very successful. A difficult goal was to expand the powers of
\"003\" by lessening its dependency on cribs. The first appearance of
the idea for a probabilitybased way to find wheel settings, as well as
to deal with garbled cipher, emerged before \"003\" was completed. 57
Taking similar British methods into consideration,58 the SIS
cryptanalysts and engineers decided to use thirty-six of \"003\'s\" own
\"M\" frames to test for the frequency of appearance of the sixteen most
unlikely letters within a fifty-two letter test decipherment. Just the
cipher text was entered. If fewer than nineteen of the fifty-two letters
that resulted from a deciphering at a particular starting point were on
the high frequency list, a \"stop\" was printed. 59

(T9//3I) Unfortunately, such use of \"003\'s\" regular frames led to the
machine being monopolized by special tests. One of the worst of them was
\"dudbusting.\" Duds were messages that should have been readable given
knowledge of their keys, but were not. They were usually the

result of operator errors such as the use of an incorrect key on a
system.

ff0//3f) Because dudbusting was one of the more important tasks assigned
to the \"003,\" and because the job took so long, a decision was made to
create a new dudbuster with its own \"frame,\" and, perhaps, a bank of
electronic counters.60 The electronics proved a bit too much for an
emergency situation, but a more efficient and quite impressive
electromechanical (relay) Arlington Dudbuster became an essential part
of the SIS\'s machine rooms. The Dudbuster worked on the principle of
recognizing plain language through a simple frequency test. Based on the
characteristics of the German language, including the absence of \"X,\"
each plain letter was assigned a weight. If the summed weights equaled a
threshold value, text was printed, then examined, to see if true German
was a result of the wheel settings.

61

(TS//SI) There was also a film RAM version of the SIS statistical
Dudbuster. Its birth led to some friction between SIS and OP-20-G.
Independently of OP-20-G, the SIS cryptanalysts conceived of their own
film Hypo. When they informed OP-20G of their great discovery in
mid1943\* \"G\'s\" men became quite embarrassed. They were forced to
admit that they had thought of the Hypo method earlier, had a machine in
development, but had not informed either the SIS or GC&CS.

(TS//SI) Despite some help from the navy, it took a long time for the
SIS to turn their Hypo dudbuster idea into hardware. It was not until
late 1944 that a special camera was linked to an \"M\" frame to generate
the images of the distribution of high frequency letters from each
Enigma setting. Those master films were then run, as in Hypo, against
cipher text to find the point of greatest coincidence. 62

(TS//SI) The film dudbuster and Hypo were often called \"Grenades.\"
Their success led the SIS





to explore the possibilities for more ambitious film attachments and
supplements for \"003.\" Unfortunately, some of the most ambitious
Grenade ideas could not be implemented. The high-speed Azalea and
Bachelor attachments were never completed, and the plans for a
superspeed film cribdragger probably did not turn into a project.63 It
is certain, however, that neither the army nor navy ever built a Grenade
that matched the grand achievement of the British in late 1943, its
electromechanical Fillibuster. It tested four cribs on eighty messages
simultaneously.6\*

(TS//SI) The alterations to Madame Xdid make it more efficient, but the
American army\'s Bombe continued to make many demands on the SIS. Its
manpower requirements were not as great as the navy\'s Bombe, but it was
a laborintensive machine. It needed more than twenty operating personnel
and forty maintenance men.

■\$¥&\] Despite the large maintenance crew, the machine had a bit of a
tendency to lose its concentration. During its first few months, all
runs were duplicated on a second control board. And well into 1944 it
could not be coaxed into running at the originally hoped-for speed. It
had been designed to run, if desired, at sixty pulses a second for short
periods, but its typical operating speed was half that, thirty pulses
per second. 65

\(U) Thus, despite its great flexibility, \"003\" was not a perfect
solution. Its successes certainly did not change the navy\'s mind about
Bombe architecture. When OP-20-G decided to build a second set of fifty
machines, it found Desch\'s commutator design much faster and more
efficient than a relay-based machine. 66

\(U) \"003\" could not be switched to a fourwheel mode, and twenty-six
separate runs had to be done to test a four-wheel message. As
objectionable to the navy\'s engineers was \"003\'s\" slow operating
speed. The automatic control system in Madame X did not fully compensate
for its long run times.

\(U) The \"003\" had another feature that did not prove as powerful as
hoped. The army machine had the circuits necessary for the \"locator\"
task done separately by the navy\'s Hypo machine, but the navy\'s
engineer-cryptanalysts did not find \"003\'s\" automatic locator that
attractive.

(TS) Near the end of the war, Joseph Wenger requested another comparison
of the army and navy \"E\" machines. Wenger decided that the OP20-G
Bombe complex was, on average, fifty times more productive than the
army\'s machine in Arlington. 67

(T0//0I) The main reason why only one \"003\" was built was the SIS\'s
inability to convince the British to yield the messages and techniques
needed to keep the machine busy.

\(U) A Machine Looking for Work

(TS//6I) Madame X\'s construction began just as GC&CS and the American
army reached a low point in their relationship. Britain\'s refusal to
inform the SIS about anti-Enigma methods led to an impasse. The
situation became quite tense. The Americans, for example, refused to let
Alan Turing see their new voice scrambler system until Britain yielded
her secrets. For a time, SIS even withheld what it was discovering about
Japanese systems.

(TS//SI) Friedman\'s group certainly must have resented Britain\'s
request that it build a super-Bombe for GC&CS while she would not share
her cryptanalytic secrets. There must have been complaints about being
asked to construct advanced machines to attack the Fish system\'s
Geheimschrieber yet not being allowed to have the desired intercepts and
cryptanalytic information on Enigma.

68

(TS//SI) The tensions were reduced in May 1943 after a series of
conferences, but there was no immediate flow of cryptanalytic secrets to





America, nor was there enough high-priority work assigned to Madame X.
The result was that it seemed to be an expensive machine without a
purpose. Then, when it was finally put to work, it served as a secondary
aid to GC&CS.

ffW The SIS had not expected such a minor role for their great computer.
Its best cryptanalysts had spent much of 1942 and 1943 trying to develop
their own \"E\" attacks, using up 1,000 hours of \"003\" time. But after
all that effort they had to admit defeat and had to yield to England\'s
monopoly of methods and its control of intercepts. The home grown
\'Yellow\" project for which \"003\" was built became asubunit of
Bletchley and, to make matters worse, most of the SIS\'s involvement
with \"E\" came through the team of men it sent to England in late 1943.
Americans were as busy running British Bombes in a small town near
Bletchley as they were running Madame X in America. Perhaps as
depressing for Rosen and his group, England was probably sending as many
German air force jobs to OP20-G as it was sending to Arlington Hall. 69
As a result, Madame X stood idle much of the time. For many days it had
to be assigned only to \"research problems.\"

BS\^- Such disappointments with the SIS Bombe program were perhaps what
forced Friedman to write a very defensive report about Madame Xin early
1944. He tried his best to show that Madame X was superior to all the
other anti- \"E\" devices. He hammered at every weakness of the
commutator Bombes, British as well as American. They were susceptible to
mechanical stress, they were not good at solving \"duds,\" and they took
much too long to record the \"hits,\" he said. He continued by citing
\"003\'s\" need for fewer maintenance personnel and by stating that the
British Bombes took twice as long as \"003\" to run an entire problem.

£ES}\*ut he could not hide the deficiencies of Madame X. He admitted
that at the very least, the \"003\" was five times as expensive as the
British

Bombes and that it was really slower than the American navy\'s machines.
He tried to conclude his report on an upbeat note, but his final
statement helps explain why Madame Xwas torn down at the conclusion of
the war:70 \"It is thought fair to state that, for purely operational
purposes, the rotary type of bombe is the most efficient but for
research and development of new solution methods, the relay type,
because of its greater flexibility, is far superior.\" Madame Xdid win
some victories, however. As an engineering project and as an example of
America\'s mass production capabilities, it captured the respect of the
British engineers. It also served as a backup system for GC&CS. It was
kept busy from 1944 to the end of the war running noncritical or
stubborn jobs sent to it by the British.

(TS//SI) \"003\" cost only one-fifth of the yearly construction budget
for a system that also found itself with much less than the expected
amount of work. The huge voice encryption system the Signal Corps and
the \"F\" section were building, the Sigsaly, had a \$5,000,000 budget
in

71

1943.

(U)Asa result of \"003\'s\" demonstration of the SIS\'s engineering
abilities, Britain asked the agency to help solve more complex
engineering problems and gladly accepted some American machines within
GC&CS.72 By the end of the war, the SIS was busy creating very advanced
machines and, like OP-20-G, was hoping for a permanent in-house computer
program. 73

\(U) More Emergencies and More Compromises

\(U) The engineers at\"G\" and the SIS may have wanted to launch a
far-reaching electronic development program at the end of 1943, but the
Allies faced too many cryptological crises to allow the pursuit of any
grand ambitions. Emergencies continued to drive the efforts at NCR and
Nebraska Avenue, as well as at Arlington Hall. Some of the crises
dictated the use of very




P.L. EO 3.

86-36 3(h)(2)


advanced technology, but others were handled by relying upon traditional
components and architecture.

(T0//3I) Relays remained essential for many devices. The army put
together increasingly powerful versions of the \"Joos polygraphic
counter\" using the SIS\'s versions of the Letterwriter equipment.
Arlington Hall\'s men also lashed together machines such as the Kryha
Decipherer and the Longitudinal Differencing machine. The navy helped
with the desktop \|

a ■\' \' \'

devices, and it went much further by putting new types of relays to work
in its electrical crib-tester for the Purple system, the Purple
Dudbuster. 74

\(U) Relays and plugboards were used in larger, stand-alone machines.
Most of them were quite powerful, although some were bizarre
combinations of primitive components. The need to create instant, yet
reliable, cryptanalytic firefighters justified their crudeness.

CES//ST) One crisis machine that had an almost vulgar look was the
embodiment of a quite elegant statistical attack. The machine was the
SIS\'s Dragon. It took almost a year to wire together all its
components.

(TS//SE) Dragon was the cribdragger SIS sent to England in late 1944 to
help GC&CS attack the German Tunny enciphering machine. It was made of
four large racks of relay panels, rows of switches, a tape reader, a
large control panel, and a set of indicating lamps. A crib was set upon
a plug-board, then the known set

tings and motions of Tunny wheels were entered through 200 switches. The
message was read in by a standard tape reader. The crib, usually six to
ten \"letters/ was tested against the message. When the machine
calculated that a significant match (psi patterns) had been made, it
stopped. The lamps indicated the Tunny wheel positions.

CES//SI) The Dragon proved so useful that GC&CS built a second version
after the American Dragon ate itself up. The noisy machine, which
contained more than 2,000 cross-point relays, had a tendency to consume
all the electrical power at GC&CS and to wear out its real contacts
within a few weeks.75 Despite its faults, it seemed such an achievement
that it was sent back to the states after the war and was proudly
displayed in the SIS museum. 76

(JS//8B Advanced statistical powers were added to the Dragons. If the
war had not ended, the Dragons might well have evolved into machines
whose sophistication rivaled the COLOSSUS. 77


TraVCl. ) Dragon





\(U) The Other Purples

\(U) In some ways the battle against the German military code and cipher
systems was easier than the one against Japan\'s navy. The Germans\'
reliance on the Enigma allowed a concentration of cryptanalytic effort.
Japan was not as cooperative. Its military did not use either a single
code or a single encryption machine. Although much was shared among
Japan\'s systems, the American and British codebreakers felt they had to
start from the beginning with each new code, cipher, or communications
subdivision system they encountered.

(T0//DI) Despite the earlier successes against the Purple enciphering
machine and the insights gained from prewar work on the Japanese navy\'s
JN25 operational code, OP-20-G never had a secure entry into any of the
major Japanese systems. 78

(TB//SI) Some of the Japanese naval systems yielded secrete more
valuable than those gained from Purple, but that information came at a
great cost. Even the rather old-fashioned code-plusadditive systems were
as or more difficult to enter than Japan\'s high-level diplomatic
machine. Japan\'s habit of frequently changing code and additive books
compounded \"G\'s\" problems.

(TS/ffii) The Japanese navy used 184 systems between December 1941 and
the end of the war. And some 1,000 different ciphers appeared on them. 79
Triumphs in uncovering the underlying logic of systems did not ensure
they could be read. An American cryptanalytic victory could be reversed
overnight by a change in additives or, more permanently, by the
introduction of new code books.

(TS//SI) Although the navy had its RAM machines, tabulators, and the
special \"NC\" machines to help discover the structures of the code and
cipher systems, some of the most important ones remained unreadable
until the

latter months of the war. One of the reasons why OP-20-G hurriedly
constructed so many relay, plugboard, and Letterwriter combinations in
late 1944 and 1945 was the need to immediately exploit the systems that
had taken so long to enter.

\(U) But even in 1942, the least resistant and quickest technological
path was the most rational choice for a search for an Ultra in the
Pacific. Only when the tried-and-true technologies proved too slow was
there an attempt to use digital electronics.

\(U) In certain instances, avoiding the risk involved in applying
electronics to the Japanese problems led to machines that should have
been named after Rube Goldberg\'s inventions, rather than after snakes
or jewels or flowers. The mandate to stay ahead of possible changes in
the famous Japanese fleet operational code system, JN25, the rush to
exploit Japan\'s long unreadable strip-cipher system, and the search to
identify mysterious naval cipher machines led to some of World War IFs
most unusual cryptanalytic machines. Viper, Python, Gypsy, Opal, Mamba,
and their relatives were clever throwbacks, but still throwbacks.

\(U) New Guys and Old Guys, New Techniques and Old Insights

\(U) After OP-20-G and GC&CS had reached an agreement about the Enigma
problem in early fall 1942, the old-timers at\"G,\" such as Mrs.
Driscoll, were transferred back to the more familiar Japanese puzzles.
The German naval problem essentially was turned over to Engstrom and his
team of bright but young and cryptanalytically inexperienced
\"outsiders.\" \"G\'s\" leaders, such as Joseph Wenger, thought that
with all the mathematical skills in \"M,\" with its advanced machines,
and with help from the British cryptanalysts, their weak background in
practical attack on systems could be overcome. \*\*





(T0//0I) The great American responsibility, the Japanese cryptanalytic
problem, was given to \"G\'s\" professional cryptanalysts and the naval
officers who had worked on the Pacific tasks before the war. They were
in a separate subgroup, \"GYP,\"81 which maintained a rather
well-calculated distance from the young men working under Howard
Engstrom. There was another group in Hawaii which continued on with its
earlier work. The British frequently gave cryptanalytic advice and sent
intercepts to both centers and to the cryptanalysts working in
Australia.

£T\$//SI) Washington was where cryptanalytic research and machine design
were conducted for both European and Asian problems. But being in one
center did not lead to agreement about crypto-methods or hardware. Those
working on the Japanese problems had different perspectives from the
young men in the \"M\" group. The distance between \"M\" and \"P\"
included approaches to cryptanalysis. \"P\" was not as enthusiastic
about abstract mathematical methods and RAMs as was \"M.\" \"P\'s\"
cryptanalysts did accept the reality that codebreaking had become amass
production operation, but they wanted tried-and-true methods and
machinery, such as \"differencing,\" the IBM equipment, and simple and
reliable electromechanical analog. 82

(T3//SI) Those preferences led to delays in the design and construction
of advanced machines for the Pacific crypto-wars. \"Ps\" reluctance to
turn to new technologies was only one reason for the delays. And it was
only one of the reasons for the many failures in the Pacific machine
project. Technological barriers and the difficult nature of the attacks
against additive code systems led to a string of well-intentioned
projects that were unable to produce machines of the stature of the
Enigma Bombes.

which thought, like Hooper, that advanced statistical methods were cures
for all crypto-problems, and the old hands in \"P,\" who trusted their
long experience with Japanese cryptologic systems.

(TC//SI) An example of the results of the different approaches to
codebreaking came in fall 1943 when frustration over the inability to
even identify a new Japanese system led to a blunt exchange between the
two types of cryptanalysts.83 The frictions had been building for some
time, with \"M\'s\" newcomers more than suggesting that on a routine
basis messages should be run through the IC, Comparator, Tessie
machines, and the advanced tabulators to identify \"busts\" or misuses
of systems. By October 1943, suggestions about such routine \"clinical\"
procedures to find \"non-random\" behavior in new systems were turning
into recriminations.

(T6//6I) There was a suggestion in late 1943 that unread systems always
be given to a new group separate from the \"YV cryptanalysts. The
proposed \"GO\" section would guarantee the application of all the new
statistical methods to the recalcitrant traffic, no matter its country
of origin or its underlying subject matter. It would, of course, take
control over new systems away from those who were immersed in
operational cryptanalytic and codebreaking attacks against families of
systems.

(TS//SI) The suggestion for setting up \"GO\" did not have to wait long
for a response. Commander L. W. Parke, one of the more experienced men
in the organization, replied with a rather guarded criticism of the
proposal. But it included more than a hint that it was \"cryptanalytic
experience\" rather than \"casual observation\" that usually led to
solutions. Parke soon became much more direct. 81

\(U) A Matter of Machines and Control

fTO/yOB The differences over cryptanalytic methodology led to some
frictions between \"M,\"

The author of the subject paper shows such a lack of comprehension of
what goes on in t\'iY thaL it \[sic\] does not deserve serious
consideration\...As to the variation from random idea \[sic\]




HMkU.iJWiiii-wiiiimrnri -mum .Mr\^.M «bb AH\[1\^\|m

a far more profitable attack is to be found in successive trials of
known and probable methods of cnciphcrmcnt. In other words cryplanah lie
experience cannot be supplanted by casual observers \[sic\] armed with
machines and/or degrees of higher learning. The subject report is
typical of the ideas that have come from (tM\'s eryptanalytieal research
group during the past year. Although a few ideas have been useful, they
were not worth the time spent in trying to help GM personnel to a belter
under-standing of the problems involved in solving .Japanese naval
ciphers.

(TS//SI) A rejoinder to Parke\'s criticism of the intellectuals reached
the desk of one of the old-timers who, apparently, decided it was best
to mark the top of each page of the renewed proposal for \"GO\" with the
words \"GM BURN BEFORE READING.\"

(TS//8I) More than pride and turf wars were involved in the tensions
between the operational and analytic types ofcryptanalysts. At times the
differences in approaches led to serious interpretive problems. The now
relatively well-known battle between the analysts in the Pacific and
those in Washington over the JN25 additives was only one of several
conflicts.85 A quite similar one took place in the summer of 1942.

(TS//SI) The JN39 Japanese Merchant Ship/Navy additive system was
introduced in August 1941 and was broken by the cryptanalytic group in
Hawaii.86 But understanding the system did not mean instant success. The
recovery of the critical additives was progressing very slowly. Then
Washington decided that it would apply its machines and analytic
techniques to the problem. It used its own method of machine
\"differencing\" to generate six times as many additives as Hawaii was
producing by hand. Washington insisted its additives were correct.\*7

£RS//fl\'f) When code and additive books were finally captured, it was
learned than some three

quarters of the Washington machine-produced additives were incorrect. A
retrospective on the problem found that the pure analytic and machine
methods were too simplistic and that \"speed\" of processing was no
substitute for such vital activities as making sure that the recoveries
actually led to readable traffic.88 The discovery about the results of
Washington\'s machine attack on \"39\" was linked to similar problems
with its work on JN25.

\(U) Such incidents perhaps restrained the operational cryptanalysts from
requesting that the \"M\" sections engineers create advanced machines to
help them break into the Japanese codes and ciphers. Asa result, most of
the machines built for the \"P\" group followed in the tradition of
Purple, a direct analog to aid the decryption process after a system had
been solved through traditional techniques.

\(U) The Snake That Died Too Young, Viper

\(U) Among the many frustrations \"G\" had to endure was the struggle
against what was thought to be one of the most important Japanese cipher
systems. In late 1942 it appeared that the Japanese navy might be on the
verge of introducing a new cipher machine - one for the most important
naval officers and ships. It had the potential to become another Purple
for the Americans, a single machine-based system that would be
relatively easy to read once the nature of the enciphering machine was
established. The Americans called the system and machine Jade.

\(U) There were, perhaps, some overly hopeful fantasies atOP-20-G that
Jade would soon replace the Japanese Navy\'s important operational code,
JN25. That additive code was being read, but with great effort and much
worry. OP20-G always fretted that the next change in it would be the one
that permanently locked out the allies.





\(U) JN157 (Jade) first appeared in December 1942. \"G\" could tell from
messages on other systems that it was carrying very important high
command communications. But the frustrations created by the unsuccessful
attack on another Japanese cipher machine, Coral, led \"G\" to conclude
that Jade was unbeatable. Until mid-1943 only minimal attention was paid
to JN157

{¥//FOUO)\~Then there were a series of very lucky discoveries. Some
busts were identified which gave a few clues to the nature of the Jade
machine and which pointed to sources for cribs.90 The belief that it was
perhaps a solvable telephone stepping-switch machine (like Purple), and
an increase in the amount of traffic on the system, led to a major
attack on Jade. 91

(3S//0I)\*Gtatistical attacks were supplemented with crib-based
\"menuing.\" \"G\'s\" engineers lashed together a primitive stepping
switch version of a new bombe to aid in the search for daily settings of
the machine.92 With the help of such machines, the attack on Jade
yielded results within a few weeks.

\(U) By October, 4,000 messages were being read by the Americans each
month. The messages contained much about logistics and, later, many
intelligence items. The cryptanalysts at\"G,\" impressed by the
high-level addresses on the messages, anticipated that Jade would soon
carry the most important operational orders and would become more
significant than the unpredictable JN25.

(T0//SI) The optimism about the possibility of conquering Jade had led
to the speedy creation of the Viper, an electromechanical analog of it,
and the construction of several handy cryptoaids.93 To speed decryption
of all the messages, several more copies of Viper were built. The later
models were quite advanced and expensive desktop automatic decipherers.
Two copies were sent to England.

\(U) Viper was in the tradition of Purple, although Lawrence Steinhardt
was its top designer. A special Kana electric keyboard was connected to
a large bank of electric stepping switches, relays, and plugboards. A
Letterwriter typewriter was at the other end and served as the printer
for the system. The Vipers looked much like the later versions of the
Purple analog. The Vipers saved hundreds of very precious hours of
analysts\' time. But they were special-purpose machines.

\(U) Because of the apparent value of JN157, a major project was begun to
create more than an analog of the system. OP-20-G put the groups at NCR
to work designing an ultra-high-speed \"grenade\" to speed the final and
most difficult steps in discovering the keys to the Jade setups. The
machine was to be powerful enough to overcome changes the Japanese might
make to the system.

\(U) Unfortunately, although the Americans continued to penetrate the
JN157 Jade system, it did not carry the expected high-level operational
messages. By early 1944, \"G\'s\" investment was not paying great
returns. Then one of the great disappointments of the war occurred.

\(U) Jade turned out to be an experiment by the Japanese, one that did
not please them. The Jade JN157 system was cancelled in mid-1944, just
as more advanced cryptanalytic machines to attack the system were being
delivered to OP-20-G. 94

\(U) It seemed that more than a year and onehalf of intense work had been
wasted. In retrospect, however, it was decided that Jade had not
provided that much important information. So its closing was not that
critical from the operational side. And the work on it did make
something of a secondary contribution to OP-20-G. It gave the
cryptanalysts hope that another system which had resisted the most
sophisticated attacks for many yearns might finally be conquered. On the





basis of the work on Jade, the Coral system project was restarted.

\(U) A Snake in Hand, Perhaps - Python

\(U) Japan had placed naval attaches in many of its embassies after World
War 1. Their job was to report on the capabilities and intentions of
foreign navies.95 The Japanese hierarchy valued their communications so
much that the attache system was given one of the nation\'s first
encryption machines, the Red. With the onset of World War II, the
attaches assigned to the Axis nations assumed an expanded role in
Japan\'s intelligence system. If their messages could be read by the
Allies, they would provide insights into the plans and the technical
prowess of all of the Axis powers.

(TS//SI) The attaches had many ciphers to communicate with (eighty-three
over the course of the war), but two seemed of special importance to the
British and American cryptanalysts, JNAio and JNA20. They appeared to be
the ones that carried the most valuable information to and from the
attaches. The first was a very difficult version of Japan\'s many
code-plus-additive systems; the other, the \"G\" and GC&CS teams
discovered, was a new type of cipher machine that would not respond to
the attacks that had broken Red or Purple. They called their new
adversary \"Coral.\"

(TS//SI) Through increased attention to the problem in Washington and
England, the beginnings of an entry into JNA10 (the code and additive
system) came in late 1943. However, full reading of all the links
between the attaches and Tokyo was delayed for many months because
special additive books had been assigned for communications between
foreign capitals and Japan. They proved even more resistant to
statistical attacks than the standard additives. 96

(T8//SI) There was elation when the fortunate discovery of some cribs
led JNA10 to open

up to the Allies. The entry came too late to be of value, however.
JNAio\'s main use was for transmission of information gained through
espionage. By 1944 Japan\'s spy networks had withered, and the system
yielded little information.

\(U) However, the attack on JNAIO did give some encouragement to those
who had attempted to read the much more important system, JNA20-Coral.
JNA20 had frustrated \"G\" for many years. The navy needed a successful
attack against it because it was used to report important technical
information concerning all the military: land, air, and sea. As
significant, its transmissions came from such vital points as Berlin and
Moscow.

GES//89 JNA20 had a long, long history, but the Coral machine had first
appeared in 1939 replacing the Red machine. It was soon distributed to
all of Japan\'s attaches. The revised JNA20 system immediately came to
the attention of the British. Although unable to read the traffic, they
continued to intercept messages throughout the war. OP-20-G also took
notice of the 1939 change in JNA20, but it was unable to intercept
enough of the transmissions from Europe to Japan to begin an attack.
That put the Americans at a disadvantage compared to the British
codebreakers; in addition to the shortage of manpower, the lack of
intercepts prevented the Americans from acquiring the necessary
cryptanalytic \"depths.\"97

\(U) The desire to penetrate Coral remained high. Because OP-20-G had
been reading Coral\'s predecessor, the Red machine, its officers
realized how significant the Coral was. As many men and machines as
could be safely taken off of other systems, such as the one for Japanese
naval operations, were assigned to the new attache problem in 1940.

CTB//BI) \"G\" tried all the standard statistical approaches. The
messages that were available were frequency analyzed to see if Coral had
the





same kind of statistical split between consonants and vowels as the old
Red and Purple machines. 98

(TC//SI) Sadly, there was no return from the investment before the
summer ofi94i- Even then, the results were slim and less than
encouraging. The time-consuming statistical tests showed the analysts
only that Coral\'s inner workings were not just slight variations on the
old Red machine. Coral, they knew, would be a very demanding problem.

\(U) The task seemed daunting, so resources were shifted to other
problems. However, when workloads allowed, \"G\'s\" analysts were
encouraged to apply the most advanced methods to uncover the
fundamentals of Coral. Some signs of progress appeared. They led to the
reestablishment of a Coral program.

(T3//3I) Many different statistical analyses and all the available RAM
machines were applied during the next two years. The new IC machine was
put to use, then Tessie. Some 100,000 message letters were counted and
matched, again and again. Digraph counts and strip studies were done to
see if Coral was related to the Enigma. Index of Coincidence tests were
made on five months\' worth of intercepts. Round Robin tests, matching
every message from a day with every other, were made. A few prewar
\"obtained\" plain texts were also analyzed. Isomorphic runs were done,
and searches for tetragraphic repeats were made using all the messages
for July 1941. All types of IBM tabulator indices were produced. The
British joined in with their own methods, applying Turing\'s advanced
hypothesis-testing concepts.

(TS//SI) The work in England and America went on throughout 1942. But
all that was determined was that Coral might be employing telephone
stepping switches, as did other Japanese devices.

(T0//GI) The attack stopped again. The RAMs and statistical techniques
had let OP-20-G down. It seemed fruitless to devote any more effort to
JNA20, despite the apparent value of its messages. The situation seemed
hopeless. There was little possibility of either a theft of a machine
(they were all in enemy territories) or a major misuse of the system.

\(U) The victory over JNi57-Jade in fall 1943 led, however, to renewed
interest in Coral. Based on what was being learned about Jade, there was
a hunch that Coral was a Roman-letter version of the JN157 machine. As
soon as possible, the Jade team was reassigned and ordered to beat
Coral.\"

gflg//SI} They joined with their counterparts in England on a six-month
major statistical attack that again called on all the RAM machines. The
goal was to reconstruct the wiring of the Coral stepping switches. The
work was intense, but little came from it. By spring 1944 many were
ready to declare that Coral was unbeatable. Mathematics again seemed
unable to fulfill Hooper\'s promises.

(TS//SI) Then, perhaps to the embarrassment of the mathematical types, a
new member of the Coral group decided to retry some cribs. He asked a
translator to see if he could place them, expecting not to hear from him
for days, if not weeks. To everyone\'s surprise, the translator returned
within a hour with a report of success. Then a longer crib was placed
and the Coral wirings were recovered.100 In early March 1944 Coral was
beaten and began to yield intelligence treasures. 101

\(U) \"G\" had already been preparing for the triumph over Coral. The
\"M\" group had been ordered to start designing an analog well before
the break occurred. The result, the Python, was a relatively crude,
quickly built desktop cousin of the Viper. Two Letterwriter typewriters
were the





input and output mechanisms. Between them was a plugboard and a large
bank of relays that could be set to imitate the \"wheels\" and motions
of Coral,

(U)) Python was put to use in mid-1944, automatically decrypting
messages and helping to test possible solutions to Coral settings.
Several more were built and served until the end of the war. While
relatively slow, the Pythons did their job with the reliability that
could not be expected from more advanced and costly electronic devices.
It was soon helped by a special analysis machine that had originally
been built for the abandoned Jade system.

(3S//SI) Supported by an ongoing statistical attack suggested by the
British, and by a homegrown crib method that broke daily keys, Coral was
made to yield some of the best intelligence of the war. The
cargo-carrying submarines that ran high-priority material between Japan
and Germany became easy targets. The German \"buzz\" bomb, radar, and
other great secrets became known to the Allies through the reports sent
to Japan by the attache in Berlin.

\(U) That attache did more for the Allies. He gave a precise description
of all the defenses on the French coast. In addition, his messages told
the Allies what the Germans thought about the timing and location of the
Allied invasion of Europe.

\(U) Of Strips and Stripper

\(U) Japan did not trust cipher machines as much as Germany did; it
employed several rather old-fashioned systems on many of its important
communications channels. Some of those primitive systems caused as much
trouble or more than Enigma or Jade or Coral. One of Japan\'s
alternative encryption devices, JN87, led to as much technological
soul-searching atOP-20-G and National Cash Register as had the cipher
machine problems.

\(U) The Americans had suspected that the Japanese navy was going to
initiate the use of a new shipboard encryption system in mid-1944. But
beyond a hint that it would be a sort of handoperated \"strip\" device,
nothing was known. When the Japanese began using the system, KG\" was
unable to read any of its messages. Then a capture was made by Filipino
troops. The instruction books and parts they seized in November 1944
were quickly sent to \"G.\" The captures and analysis of JN87 intercepts
led to a partial but important solution by early December.

\(U) JNS/s device was quite like the American Navy\'s own strip cipher.
The \'87 had aplastic board holding strips that had alphabets printed on
both sides. There was a stock of one hundred two-sided strips to chose
from. Thirty at a time were placed in the board, with their particular
vertical and horizontal arrangement set according to complex
specifications given in a book of instructions.

(TB) The JN87-based fleet communications became so numerous that hand
deciphering was an impossibility. Thousands of intercepts began to pile
up; the backlog seemed to contain items of importance. To solve the
problem, \"G\" instructed Lawrence Steinhardt to build a reliable
machine as quickly as possible. His design reflected how little time he
had to complete the analog. At least he was able to show a sense of
humor: he gave the machine the name of the famous American striptease
dancer, Gypsy Rose Lee. 102

4S) The NCML\'s engineers at NCR were given the responsibility for
construction. They worked on the control portion of Gypsy, a formidable
task. Ralph L. Palmer was in charge, and he was determined that his team
would overcome all the difficulties. His crew worked double shifts and
stayed on the job through the Christmas holidays. That allowed them to
solder the required 40,000 connections in Gypsy\'s-central cabinet. 103
Meanwhile, the navy\'s engineers and, perhaps, some WAVES were wiring
the many \"strips\"





(plugboards) as quickly as the cryptanalysts could recover them from
analysis of JN87 depths.

(TS//8I) Both teams were successful. Gypsy was in operation a month
after it was ordered. Unfortunately, just as Gypsy began its work, the
Japanese altered their system, and the boards had to be rewired. The
Washington unit became very efficient at that; the Japanese began to
change all the strips every three months or so. 104

(T0//i\>r) Steinhardt\'s Gypsy was aget-thejob-done machine. It was a
large, 4,000-pound relay, stepping-switch, and plugboard combination
that required a central control unit and five separate six-foothigh
bays. Each of the bays contained five large plugboards. Each board was
hand-wired to represent four of the JN87 strips. Because the strips were
two-sided, the Gypsy plugboards were constructed to represent eight
choices.

(TS//SI) The control unit had switches to select the desired \"strips\"
and which of their sides were to be used. The Gypsy\'s operator could
also automatically shift the \"strips\" and set other crypto-variables.
Banks of lights signalled which boards and which offsets had been
selected. Then the enciphered message was typed on the machine\'s Kana
input typewriter. If the message was free of garbles and Gypsy was
correctly set, clear text was printed on a Letterwriter typewriter. The
JN87 messages seemed so important and Gypsy so useful that another model
was ordered. It was to be used in Hawaii. It was planned to have a tape
reader as input to speed processing.

\(U) Strips without Strippers

happy career. Topaz and Mamba became examples of the danger of relying
upon special-purpose machines, even when they could be built quickly
with tried-and-true parts. Both Topaz and Mamba arrived after their
target problems had disappeared.

\(U) Topaz was quite similar to Gypsy in its architecture and purpose. It
was another huge plugboard and relay combination for semiautomatic
deciphering through removal of the influence of \"strips.\" But its task
was a bit different than Gypsy\'s. The \"strips\" used by the Japanese

£¥&) Two other machines built for \"strip\" problems did not have such a

(IO//OI ) Manfca





on their navy merchant marine JNn communications represented additives.
JN11 was a superenciphered code system and a very important one which
often served as the window into Japanese communications when other codes
were unreadable.

\(U) Topaz was clever. It removed the additives and printed the resulting
code. But the two models of Topaz were rarely used. They arrived too
late to be employed on current JN11 traffic, and, despite their being
modified to work on the famous JN25 system, their short lives were spent
working on old JN11 messages. 107

(\$} One of the most unusual machines that OP-20-G brought into its RAM
collection was Mamba. It combined IBM cards, relay circuits, and analog
decision making in a five-foot-high metal cabinet. It looked like a
friendly, many-eyed monster because of its two round signal lights and
its small voltage meters.,o8

i&) Mamba\'s unique feature was its input system, an electromechanical
card scanner. Located on a shelf at the center of the machine, the
scanner shifted IBM cards holding cipher over a set of others punched
for key. Mamba sensed how many of the 2,400 tiny metal brushes (ten
digits in eighty columns in three cards) made contact as the message
cards were moved, column by column, over the key cards. Mamba\'s goal
was to exploit a weakness in many of the Japanese code systems, one that
had become important to the American attacks. All legitimate code groups
were evenly divisible by three.

rB\> Mamba\'s electrical weighting component could be set to stop the
machine when accumulated \"scores\" exceeded a threshold value. When
enough of the brushes made contact through coincident holes in the
cards, the scanner\'s power was cut off. Once the machine stopped, its
operators recorded the source of the \"hits\" by hand.

-6S) Although relatively crude, and useful only when the cryptanalysts
had a good idea of which page of additives had been applied to a
message, Mamba seemed so promising that two were constructed at NCR.
They were delivered to the navy in the last days of 1944.

(U//rOUO) It was expected that Mamba would vastly reduce the amount of
hand work needed for the JN11 system. But the Mambas arrived after the
specific system they were designed for \"died.\" To salvage some of the
investment, at least one was modified to perform what was called a
\"maximal-minimal\" attack on JN25. 109

\(U) The Attack on the Many JN25S

\(U) The new automatic enciphering machines, such as the Enigma, Jade,
and Coral, have been crypto-historians\' favorites. The machines and the
attack on them have an inherent attraction. The mechanical complexities
are fascinating, and the logic of the attacks are intellectually
challenging. In addition, the machines that were built to fight them,
the Bombes and the Colossi, are symbols of the coming of the new
information age. The Bombes and Colossi are also physical reminders of
how difficult codebreaking had become by the 1940s.

\(U) But more important in terms of the war in the Pacific than the
automatic enciphering machines were old-fashioned systems, such as the
Japanese Fleet General-Purpose Code, and JN25. Codes like \"25\" proved
as or more difficult to penetrate than machine ciphers. JN25, an
additive system, took so much effort that a special and very large \"G\"
cryptanalytic group was created early in the war.

\(U) In Washington alone, some 800 people were working on \"25.\" \"° By
the later months of 1943\> Howard Engstrom\'s \"M\" group became





involved. It began to devote much of its time to finding practical
designs for very, very rapid machines with enormous amounts of memory to
handle the special demands of the JN25 problem.

\(U) Because of the special challenges posed by code systems, \"G\" was
unable to create an equivalent to the Bombe for the Japanese codes. And
they were unable to devise electronic devices. \"M\" had to concentrate
on creating \"memory\" machines from what was technologically at hand.
Although compromises, the machines they came up with promised to be more
productive than the standard tabulators, the navy\'s NC machines, or the
relay-tabulator Slide Run machines that were used by the army.\"1

•£¥&) JN25 was a difficult problem for several reasons. The primary one
was the general nature of well-fashioned code plus additive systems.
They left analysts awash in unknowns, forcing them to grab at
cryptanalytic straws to make any progress. Although codes can be
analyzed through frequency tests quite similar to those used on the
distributions of letters in cipher systems, doing so is quite demanding
and usually yields less rewarding answers. Counts of code groups in
large collections of messages can yield good pointers to frequently used
words in a language, such as \"to\" or \"the,\" and to word combinations
typically found in military messages such as \"Fleet orders.\"

fPS)- Identifying one group can help find the meaning of another. But
codes with thousands of groups, several of which stand for the same
plain language word, usually do not open up as a result of frequency
tests.

\(U) The frustrations involved in trying to solve a code system without
the aid of captures or operator errors grow exponentially when the
underlying codes are themselves enciphered. Adding or subtracting
numbers tends to mask the frequencies of the code groups. If the
\"additives\" are from a long list or, worse, are randomly gen

erated, there is little chance of removing their influence.

\(U) Additive systems have been in use around the world for generations,
and attacks on them began when they first appeared. Some very complex
methods had been developed to help identify additives. Attacks such as
\"differencing\" were relatively freestanding. To begin the arduous
process of rounds of subtraction and cycle analysis, differencing only
asked for messages that were in \"depth.\" But much depth was required.
Differencing needed bulk cipher-text that was known to have been
enciphered with the same key. But the method had at least the potential
for automation. 112

\(U) In contrast to differencing, most other approaches were based on
common sense, were difficult to automate, and were useful only after
some significant breakthroughs into the additive and code systems had
been achieved. A frequently used one was to assume that some additives
were known, then subtract them from the cipher, then match the resulting
plain code against a long list of known and highly frequent code groups.
If a match, or a significant number of matches, was found, additional
effort was invested in producing a plain text and increasing the list of
known code groups.

\(U) Other methods demanded the use of very experienced codebreakers.
They required knowledge of military systems and a craftsman\'s insight
once additives had been removed. For example, an analyst might begin his
attack by assuming that previously known stereotyped phrases or usages
were in the messages. After seeing if his intuition led to an
interpretation that made sense, a tentative meaning would be assigned to
a code group. Then other messages would be searched to double check the
hunch. If consistency was found, many messages would be processed in
order to construct a file of appropriately weighted \"high frequency\"
code groups. That file would be checked and updated in an endless cycle
as it was




IOM Sfcl\'KbmiUMINII/KbL IU U&A, AU3, CAM, ODR AMD HZU/XI

used to see if correct additives had been discovered, and to see if
meanings could be attached to more of the recovered numeric codes.

\(U) The Americans had used all those methods in the 1920s and 1930s, and
they applied them to Japan\'s World War II systems. But JN25 had its own
particular difficulties, ones that challenged the traditional attacks.
First, it had a very lengthy code book. Its first one, of 1939,
contained over 30,000 groups; later versions had more than 50,000 of the
five-digit codes. That meant that even when a clear code group was
intercepted, its meaning was very difficult to determine. More than one
code number might stand for the same word or phrase. In addition, the
Americans thought they might be facing a system in which one code group
could have different meanings depending upon context.

\(U) None of the old cryptanalytic standbys appeared in JN25\'s early
years. Unfortunately for \"G,\" JN25 code books were not \"obtained,\"
there were few operator mistakes, and OP-20-G was unable to discover
many cases in which a JN25 message was sent on a system that was being
read. The only recourse OP-20-G had was to try to intensify the
application of the tedious and frustrating traditional attacks it had
used before the war.

\(U) The Japanese did not make things easy for \"G,\" although they did
employ a few techniques that deviated from the rule of randomness. One
of the errors the Japanese made, but an important one, was to facilitate
the detection of garbled messages by making legitimate code groups
divisible by three.113 The use of that \"pattern\" vastly reduced the
number of true code groups the Americans had to identify, and it also
eased the search for additives.

\(U) The Americans had achieved some brilliant but temporary successes
against JN25 using old-fashioned hand methods supplemented by the IBM
tabulators. Enough of JN25 was under

stood in mid-1942 to give \"G\" its first great triumph.114 With only a
handful of people and a few tabulating machines, \"G\'s\" branch in
Hawaii was able to contribute vital information on the coming Midway and
Coral Sea battles. The contribution was marked by controversy, however.

\(U) The analysts in the Pacific had disagreed with the conclusions by
\"G\'s\" experts in Washington about the correct interpretation of the
codes and additives. The analytic group in Hawaii had faith in
\"experience\" while Washington relied more upon formal analytic
methods. Unfortunately for the chief analyst in Hawaii, Joseph J.
Rochefort, being correct about the contents of JN25 did not prevent him
from being disciplined for deviating from prescribed reporting
practices. 113

(TS//SI) But there was much in the JN25 systems that made them very,
very difficult. The codes were hidden by the use of nearly random
additives that were contained in lengthy books. The first of the
additive books had 300 pages, each holding 100 five-digit numbers. A
complex and very opaque indicator system was employed to communicate
which page and which starting point were to be used for a message. All
JN25 indicators were scrambled in one way or another, and their
encryption algorithms were frequently changed.

\(U) More than indicator systems were altered to thwart cryptanalysis.
During the first two years of its life, the JN25 code was replaced once
and the additive books were changed six times. The replacement of the
additive books continued throughout the war. Worse, the code itself was
changed at very critical moments. That meant the need to reconstruct the
code meanings all over again. When the Japanese changed additives,
codes, and indicator systems all at the same time, it was devastating
for the Americans. That was the reaction in 1944 when there was a total
change in \"25.\"





■(T0//0D Despite all the experience it had gained, in mid-1944 \"G\"
worried that it might never reenter JN25. Only errors on the less
valuable JN11 systems allowed it into operational messages while its
crew frantically tried to determine the meanings of the thousands of new
\"25\" codegroups. 116

\(U) The difficulties caused by the JN25 system changes were multiplied
as the Japanese divided the \"25\" system into more and more separate
networks or \"channels.\" Each had its own procedures. Entry into one
was not a guarantee that others would be read.

\(V) The Comparators That Weren\'t: the Copperhead Proposals and the
Victory of Electrornechanics

£S} It had become clear to OP-20-G and the SIS, which was tackling
similar problems, that automation was needed to handle the Japanese
codes. The first responses were predictable. Both the army and navy
turned to mechanics, tabulators, and relay devices. The SIS engineers
and their allies at IBM extended the reach of the relay tabulator
combinations through the Slide-Run machines. \"G\" counted on similar
devices until \"M\" began to involve itself with JN25. It recommended
the construction of a host of permutations of Bush\'s ideas.
Unfortunately, only one was accepted, and it evolved into a punch tape,
not a microfilm machine.

(S)-The navy had asked the practical engineers at the Navy Yard under
Don Seiler for help fighting code systems before the war began. By 1940
he built a fifty-wheel cam and gear device that was driven by hand
cranks. It tested cipher and additives for divisibility by three.117 The
next response by both the army and navy was to modify the tabulators.
The goal was to speed up the false subtraction processes used in both
differencing and additive stripping. The navy\'s NC machines began
arriving before the war broke out, and the army quickly drafted plans
for its

Slide Run machines. Those combinations of complex relay boxes and
tabulator equipment were difficult to build, however, and did not come
into operation until the last months of 1943. \"8

£S} OP-20-GM\'s team wanted to create machines faster and much more
powerful than the NCs or the Slide Run devices. Lawrence Steinhardt was
given the responsibility. He helped draft a series of proposals in
mid-1942. Each fit with his and John Howard\'s previous work at MIT.
While the designs were being mulled over, Steinhardt rescued the idea
that film and photoelectric technology could be used for frequency tests
against JN25. Apparently such a hope had almost been killed in early
1942. 119

(S3 One of the first challenges Howard Engstrom had presented to
Eastman-Kodak was to produce a machine for additive code systems. With
the ex-IBM engineer John Skinner acting as the liaison, Eastman quickly
arrived at an ambitious design for an \"automatic decoder.\" The device
was to strip additives, locate the plain code in a large dictionary, and
set down the meaning of the code. Eastman was not sure whether
electronics or older technologies would be used to do the stripping; but
it was committed to developing optical discs to store the code meanings
and to a fast-flash system to print the results. To \"G\'s\"
disappointment, just as Engstrom thought of asking Eastman to prepare a
detailed design, the company announced it was too busy with the IC and
Tessie projects. 12°

{&} Given the difficulties at Eastman, Engstrom turned to Lawrence
Steinhardt.121 He handed him the responsibility for the additive
systems. He began exploring machine alternatives in mid-1942. But he was
not allowed the opportunity to turn his general ideas into specifics
until mid-1943. The Atlantic problem took all of \"M\'s\" resources
until then.

\(S) Steinhardt\'s initial suggestions relied upon Bush\'s favored
technologies. They were

™ \"T\"\"rTfilnnl\"\"Tlinn T\" \"1ii\*i, /WE, \"AN, \^RR flMn N7I fl




sometimes referred to as the Copperhead proposals. The first of them was
for a photo-optical machine that was to be a high-speed replacement of
Seller\'s device. It was to have base-three tube ring counters. Its job
was to subtract suspected additives code groups found in messages
already aligned in depth. Its goal was to point to the most likely
additives through the \"divisible-by-three\" criterion. It took a year
after the initial sketch to produce a detailed design. Then when it was
examined, it was abandoned, declared to be too electronically
adventuresome.

TS\^The next plan, also envisioning photooptical technology, was more
architecturally ambitious. It was intended to automate the sophisticated
method of\'Jeeping.\" It was a means of identifying likely additives and
then code groups. \"Jeeping\" was an extension of the differencing
method; an extension that called for a large amount of high-speed memory
and nearendless rounds of running messages against each other. It was
based on the probability that if cipher texts that had been enciphered
with the same \"keys\" were subtracted from each other, an identifiable
\"difference\" would lead to plain code and correct additives. The
difference could be checked against a huge catalog containing all the
possible differences between high frequency code groups in a system.
\"Jeeping\" was a valuable method, but it soaked up hours of effort to
process just a few \"differences.\"

\#f) Although \"Jeeping\" was a method that should have been automated,
the photo-optical machine, with the high-speed photographic reproduction
of hits that it demanded, was too much for \"M.\" The detailed mid-1943
pian for the proposed Mark II was shelved. Even a simplified version,
without automatic recording, was abandoned.

(S\^Bush\'s fundamentals received another setback when Copperhead II was
rejected as too

complicated. It was a film version of a Slide Run machine. Its job was
to subtract known additives in a system from masses of cipher text, then
run the results against a huge file of already known high-frequency
plain codes. If enough matches resulted, the machine was to issue a
signal and record the hit. With that information, an analyst could align
more text and add to the files of known additives and codes. 123

fS\^Even a reduced version of Copperhead II was rejected. The Mark Vwas
to have a smaller \"memory,\" although its matching decisions were to be
based on a complex weighting system derived from studies of language and
code frequencies. The debates over the merits of those \"Hall\" and
\"Shinn\" weights may have been one reason why the Mark V was not
completed.

(S}-The only one of Stein hardt\'s designs that was accepted and turned
into hardware was Copperhead I. And its technology was a major
compromise. It became a punched tape, not a film machine. That it was
built at all is an indication of how much JN25 worried the
cryptanalysts. 124

4\$)- Copperhead I was a device to aid them when they had no entry into
a system. It was an embodiment of a \"Brute Force\" method that was used
in moments of desperation. Its purpose was to fill the void when the
cryptanalysts did not have enough recovered additive or code values to
even begin using tools such as differencing or \"Jeeping.\" A large
volume of cipher text was run in the hopes of finding \"double repeats\"
which would indicate which messages and their offsets were in depth. A
double repeat was when the same two encrypted code values appeared in
two texts at the same distance apart from each other. It was calculated
that locating such matches vastly increased the probability that a depth
had been found. 125





\(U) Beyond the Copperheads - the JN25 Crisis and \"M\'s\" Response

tT0//0t) Howard Engstrom would have ordered Lawrence Steinhardt to turn
toother problems after the Copperhead defeats, but there were signs that
JN25 and other Japanese additive systems were undergoing a series of
changes. There was fear they might become unreadable. High-speed
machines to meet the new Japanese challenges seemed essential. As a
result, Steinhardt was ordered to explore all types of alternatives to
Bush\'s favored technologies.

(TS//SI) As Steinhardt searched for new possibilities, including digital
electronics, other engineers at SIS and \"M\" moved towards electronic
solutions to German challenges. Like Steinhardt, they were pushed by
cryptanalytic needs that could not possibly be met with the older
technologies. By 1944 both the army and navy were moving far beyond the
original Bombes and Bush\'s Comparator. 126

Notes

1\. (U) Bradley F. Smith\'s The Codebreakers War, (Novato: Presidio
Press, 1993) details the struggles of the army to gain entry into Ultra.

2\. CFS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Washington E Traffic, Notes on
Correspondence\" circa February 1942. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XIIZ,
\"Green Analog,\" May, 1953. A most important source showing the
concentrated work SIS did on the complex German diplomatic systems is
found in (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History, Machine Branch,\" np.
nd. (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series IVB-1-11, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch,\" October 29,1947.

3\. (T0//0I) NSA AHA ACC 16844. \"History of the Special Projects Branch,
SIS ETOUSA.\"

4.(U) NSA release, Theodore M.Hannah, \"Frank B. Rowlett: A Personal
Profile,\" 522. NARA RG457, SRH-004, \"The Friedman Lectures on
Cryptology.\"

5\. (U) Thomas Parrish, The Ultra Americans: The United States\' Role in
Breaking the Nazi Code (New York: Stein & Day, 1987), 45

6.(U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency,\"
Volume II, 82, and SRH-362, \"History ofthe SSA Vol. Ill, The Japanese
ArmyProblems: Cryptanalysis, 1942-1945.\" Edward J. Drea, MacArthur\'s
Ultra (University of Kansas Press, 1992), 10. NARA RG457, SRH-145,
\"Collection of Memoranda on Operations of SIS Intercept Activities and
Dissemination 1942-1945,\" 01, and SRH-361, \"History ofthe SSA\" Vol.
II, 250, 272. Ronald Lewin, The American Magic, 38 (New York:
Farrar-Strauss, 1982). (S//SI) NSA CCH Oral History Interview OH 04-82
with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

7.(U) NARA RG457, SRH-004, \"The Friedman Lectures on Cryptology,\" 171.

8\. (U) Cipher A. Deavours and Louis Kruh, Machine Cryptography and
Modern Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Massachusetts Artech House, 1985), 238.
NARA RG457, SRH-305, \"The Undeclared War: The History ofRI,\" 15
November 1943, byLaurance F. Safford, Captain, U.S. Navy, and SRH-159,
\"Preliminary Historical Report ofthe Solution ofthe B Machine.\"

9\. (U) Edward J. Drea, MacArthur\'s Ultra (Lawrence: University of
Kansas Press, 1992), xii, 61-2.

10\. (U) Again, the documents found in the Garland Covert Warfare series
are most rewarding. See \"History of3-US,\" 010-026, and \"Origins,
Functions and Problems ofthe Special Branch, MI.\" Useful background on
army intelligence is in Bruce W. Bidwell, History ofthe Military
Intelligence Division, Department ofthe Army General Staff: 1775-1941,
(University Publications of America, nd).

11\. r9) NSA RAM File, June 23,1943, OP-20-G to OP-20, \"Army has agreed
to tell England too much.\" NARA RG457, SRH-349, \"Achievements ofthe
SSA In World War II,\" 31, and SRH-361, \"History ofthe Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 11-22, 250,
276-283.

\"TS\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History of GET (TUNNY) Research.\"

12\. (U) Edward J. Drea, MacArthur\'s Ultra (Lawrence: University of
Kansas Press, 1992), xii.





Geoffrey Ballard, On Ultra Active Seruice (Richmond, Australia: Spectrum
Publications, 1991), 194231.

13\. fS\^ Perhaps it was SIS\'s first failure with Freak that led Joseph
Desch to accept the design for Mike, the huge mechanical counter NCR
built later in the war. fSfNSA CCH Series XII Z, Inventories of RAM
Equipment, 1945.

14-\^SJ- Perhaps it was SIS\'s first failure with Freak that led Joseph
Desch to accept the design for Mike, the huge mechanical counter NCR
built later in the war, f\[oo58\].

15\. 0SO//OI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"MA.C. Outlines \#11, Freak.\" &\$).
NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA, \"History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume
Nine, History of the Development Branch,\" 10 February

1953.

16\. (U) The use of condensers for such storage was \"in the air\" at the
time, including at MIT, and similar systems were used in the ENIAC.

17\. (TS//SI) The seven condensers could hold 128, but Freak counted only
up to 99. pTG//3fr NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"M.AC. Outlines \#11, Freak.\"

18\. \#\>•) Many of the storage uses of condensers were based upon
setting constant values by hand. Thus, Freak was quite an adventure.

19\. fg.) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Freak I,\" May 1953.

20\. e») NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA \"History of the Signal Security Agency,
Volume Nine, History of the Development Branch,\" 10 February 1953, 83.

21\. flS//8q. NARA RG457, SRH-349, \"Achievements of the SSA In World War
II,\" 18. University of Pennsylvania Van Pelt library Archives, Papers
of John Mauchly, 2B-io:a 209,14, October 11,1945 and April 14,1945
\"Visit to SIS and Cryptologic Problems.\" NARA RG457, SRH-361,
\"History- of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 237. (TB//Sf) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History,
Machine Branch,\" np. nd. (■EG//93 NSA CCH Series IVB-1-11, \"History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch,\" October
29,1947.

22\. (TB//SP NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History, Machine Branch,\" np. nd.,
30-37.

23\. (3S) NSA CCH Series IV, V 10.6, Chief Signal Officer, \"A Chronology
of the Cooperation Between the

SSA and the London Office ofGCCS,\" 2 June 1946. (TB//CI) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, \"Washington E Traffic, Notes on Correspondence\" circa February
1942. (TC//OI) NSA CCH Series TV B-i-u, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch, October 29,1947.

24\. (TD//OI) NSA CCD Series IVB-1-11, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch,\" October 29,1947, 84.

25\. (TS//&I) NSA CCD Series IV B-i-n, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch,\" October 29, 1947, 22-23, 88.
(TO//OI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History, Machine Branch,\" np. nd., 24.

26\. tm NSA CCH Series IV B, \"History of ASA Equipment (Development
Branch) History,\" December 1942, 30 June 1944

27\. ■{TS//SI) ft42211\] (TS//DI) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"History, Machine
Branch,\" np. nd., 51, 62.

28\. OS\#Si) NSA Series XII Z, MAC Outlines, \"The Slide Run Machine.\"

29\. ff0//8f) NSA Series XII Z,MAC Outlines, \"The Slide Run Machine.\"
(TS//SH NSA CCH Series IVB-l-ii, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch,\" October 29, 1947. The first
\"F\"-built machines had two cabinets.

30\. (TO//Or)- NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. Other relay-tab combinations such as the JMA and the
\"deciphering machine\" were built by SIS to perform similar tasks for
additive systems.

31\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, MAC Outline \#4, \"The Slide Run
Machine.\"

32\. CTO//3I) NSA CCH Series IIZ, MAC Outline \#4, \"Slide Run Machine.\"

33- m NSA CCH Series XII Z.0P-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film I. C.
Machine,\" 8 June 1945.

34\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series TVB-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two; The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 272.

35\. Cm NARA RG457, SRMA011, \"Senior Staff Meeting Notes,\" August
18,1942, Friedman memorandum \"Establish Section F.\" David J.Crawford,
The Autoscritcher and the Superscritcher, forthcoming. The Annals of the
History of Computing illustrates the advanced technical achievements
of\"F.\" In fact, \"F\"





may have forged a bit ahead of OP-20-G in respect to the use of digital
electronics. One reason may have been that \"F\" was under less pressure
to solve immediate cryptologic crises. Again, NSA SRH-391, \"U. S.
Cryptologic History,\" contains dates somewhat different than those
found in RAM file documents and other relevant SRH volumes. fP9\> ASA
CCH Series IV B, \"History of ASA Equipment (Development Branch)
History, December 1942 -30 June 1944-\" (S//SI) NSA CCH Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982, 96.

36\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency,
Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 287.

37\. (¥8//Si) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 272.

38\. ffS//0r) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 258.

39\. (U) NSA SRH-391, \"U. S. Cryptologic History,\" 120, provides a hint
that the SIS\'s relay machine may have first been explored by the
British and shown to the Americans under direct order from Churchill.
Other sources, such as a letter from George Stibitz to the author,
suggest the relay machine was an American idea.

40\. (TS//SI) NSA RAM File, J. N. Wenger to OP-20-G, September 3,1942,
\"Part II of Report of J. N. Wenger, Capt. USN,\" 1. Letter to the
author from George R. Stibitz, June 7,1987. NSA RG457, SRH-361,
\"History of the Signal Security Agency,\" 250, 257, 272-3. At least one
source claims that the American army\'s cryptologists were informed of
and worked on the FISH traffic as early as August 1942. That source also
claims that some machines were built in America for the automated
solution of that binary system. However, there is no claim that the army
built anything like the Colossus for the problem. See NARA RG457,
SRH-349, \"Achievements of the SSA In World War II,\" 18.

41\. £S} Rosen did not lose faith in electronic solutions. In June 1943
he suggested a machine solution for the commercial Enigmas that would
include a frame from the relay Madame X bombe and as many as fifty-two
\"counters\" made of vacuum tubes.

(\^-NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert o. Ferner, \"Rapid Analytic Machinery
Needed for Research,\" June 3,

1943

42\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 258. {¥9\* NSA
CCH Series IV B, \"History of ASA Equipment (Development Branch)
History, December 1942-30 June 1944. f\[422i\]. The contract with
Western Electric was for only about \$2,000. The F branch annual report
for 1944 listed a project for a high-speed rotor for the period May
November 1944. \$8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Annual Reports, Development
Branch, 1943-4.

43\. (TS//OI) NARA RG227, Box 73, February 29, 1944, Stibitz toNDRC,
\"Secrecy re NCR product.\" Williams went on to build many huge relay
computers for the military ordnance groups during World War II, and he
designed and patented an electronic computer. Michael R. Williams, A
History of Computing Technology (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:
PrenticeHall, 1985), 225-240. Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825,
Honeywell v Speiry-Rand , Trial Records, February, 1942, S.B. Williams
toNDRC, \"Fire control proposal,\" and Reports on Electronic Computer
Designs byS. B.Williams, November 1941, January 1942, March 13, 1942.
NSA RAM File, September 3,1942, \"Wenger to OP-20-G, bombe project;\"
September 9,1942, \"Machine Research Section (F)\"; \"Part II of Report
of J. N. Wenger, Capt. USN,\" land October 10, 1942, \"Enigma Machine
Contract.\" Letter to the author from George R. Stibitz, June 7,1987.
The army\'s single machine cost over \$1,000,000. NSA RG457, SRH361,
\"History ofthe Signal Security Agency,\" 257, 272-3. NARA RG457,
SRH-349, \"Achievements ofthe SSA In World War II,\" 29. NARA RG457,
SRH-61, \"History ofthe Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 251.

44- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,0P-20-G \"Memoranda on Bombe and the
relationship ofthe U. S. and U. K.,\" circa 1943. In addition to not
fulfilling all the expectations of automatic setups, 003 did not
incorporate some features suggested after its first design was set. In
mid-1943 one ofthe SIS cryptanalysts suggested that a Madame X frame be
combined with electronic counters to allow a purely statistical





attack. A later machine, the SIS Dudbuster did have something like that
configuration, but it became a separate machine, not an integral part of
003. (9)-NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert 0. Ferner, \"Rapid Analytic
Machinery Needed for Research,\" June 3,1943. Technical details of 003
may be found in an early report, (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"X-68003,
Bell Laboratories Report, April 2, i943-\"\'t3//3I) NSA CCH Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982..

45\. (TS//SI) After some experience with the 003, a menu with a sure crib
of twelve letters was considered useful although it would produce more
false hits than a strong menu of fifteen or so letters

46\. (S//CI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

47- (TD//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z(S-2568), \"Tentative Brief
Descriptions of Cryptanalytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" circa
1945.

48\. (-¥S//S1) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 265. (\*8)
(S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of General
Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March, 1945- W NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow Machine,\" 3,54.

49\. (TS//6I) NSA RAM File, February 21,1944, W.A Wright toOP-20-G,
\"Comparison of Army and Navy Enigma Equipment,\" and January 18, 1943,
to OP-20-G/da, \"Report of Meeting on Army Bombe.\"

50\. iSy NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow
Machine,\" 50-52.

51\. (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security\'
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 265. For
insight into how much SIS had learned about Enigma methods by the end of
1943, see (6) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The
Yellow Machine,\" especially pages 31 and 35. These suggest that the
British had developed their own \"machine guns.\" (T3//3I) NSA CCH Local
Archive, \"Army-Navy Descriptive Dictionary of Cryptologic Terms,\" Army
Security Agency, February i947\--fS)- NSA AHA ACC 16890N, \"Bombe
Operations, Control, and Testing, Duds and Railwav E.\"

52\. (TS//BI) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 265rf9)-NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow Machine,\" 35.

53- W NSA AHA ACC 16890N \"Bombe Operations, Control, and Testing, Duds
and Railway E.\"

54- (T3//3I) NSA AHA 16331, \"6812th Signal Security Detachment (PROV)
Apo 413 Army,\" 15 June 1945, 35- 4  NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow Machine,\" 40.

55- (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 265.

56\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953, and various years.

57- -GS} The SIS cryptanalysts, Ferner and Small, worked on several
statistical and technological approaches to a \"Dudbuster.\" -\$S) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow- Machine.\" f&}
NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert 0. Ferner, \"Rapid Analytic Machinery
Needed for Research,\" June 3,1943.

58\. (TS//SI) NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. &C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol III,
German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution,\" 204.

59\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa
1953, MAC Outline \# 12, \"The Arlington Dudbuster.\"

60\. rS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert o. Ferner, \"Rapid Analytic
Machinery Needed for Research,\" June 3,1943

6i.fTS//SI) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 266. r¥S\>
(S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of General
Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March,

1945

62\. (¥S//SQ NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 266.

63\. ffO//S» NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953, and various years.

Page 15S




64\. fl\'S//5T) NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. & C. S. Naval SIGINT, Vol 111,
\"German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.\"

65\. CSS.) (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of
General Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March, 1945. t&rNSA
CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow Machine,\" 52.

66\. (U) NSA RAM File, Part II of Report to J. N. Wenger, Capt. USN,
\"Resume of the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World War II,\" and
\"History of NCML and OP-20-G-4E, June, 1944,\" \"n530 bombes in
operation.\"

67\. £PS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946.

68\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12OO8) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC(0P-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944 \[sic\]. On Britain\'s request to
SIS to build a Bombe and to build analog of the \"G\" machine, •£\$) ASA
CCH Series IV B, \"History of ASA Equipment (Development Branch)
History, December 1942,\" 30 June 1944, 42-44

69\. PSJjSf) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems.\" (T0//3f) NSA
AHA ACC 16844. \"History of the Special Projects Branch, SIS
ETOUSA\"tSTNSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow
Machine,\" 44.

70\. {¥S)\_ NSA AHA 35529, Friedman to Corderman, 29 March, 1944,
\"Comparison of our \"003\" type of \"Bombe\" with the rotary type.\"

71\. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Annual Reports, Development Branch,
1943-4.

72\. (U) F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World War,
Volume I (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 58. NARA RG457,
SRH-361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The
General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 15,243, 269,277.

73\. (U) David J. Crawford, The Autoseritcher and the Superscritcher,
forthcoming, The Annals of the History of Computing , NARA RG457,
SRH-361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The
General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 269-270.

74.-frO//aijMAC Outline 30, MAC Outlines 103, SATYR. 4& NSA AHA ACC
26373, Chief, \"F\"

Branch, \"RAM Equipment,\" 29 March 1945. The first model of Satyr was
built at Dayton in late 1944. Four additional models were made by the
navy and the SIS group built its own version. All of them were quite
direct analogs of the popular Hagelin machine. They even incorporated
wheels from an actual Hagelin. Relays and plugboards eased the task of
setting the machine.

75\. fei NSA CCH, G. 0. Hayward \"Operation Tunny: Deciphering German
Teleprinter Traffic in WWII atBletchley Park,\" 14 July 1989,
Z/1396GW/9000/5, 9

76\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, CIT Paper TS47, \"Report on
British Attack on FISH,\" Washington, May 1945. f/ES) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, \"Fish\'Dragon Notes,\" February 1945. (TS//SB NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Fish Notes,\" 17 January 1945. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"MAC.
Outlines \#21, Tunny Dragon.\"

77- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"MA.C. Outlines \#21, Tunny Dragon.\"

78\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV.W.I.5.13, \"The History of OP-20-GYP-1,
1939-1945.\" The veryserious and frightening blackouts caused by changes
to Japanese systems, especially the trauma of fall 1944, are well
described in (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.25.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP,\" new Chapter 111, espec. 24.

79- (TS//SQ NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12, \"History of OP-20-3-GYP,\" new
Chapter III, 2.

80\. (■¥87YSTTNSAL-566o CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP,\" Appendix 1,5.

81\. (TO//0I) Most of the following discussion refers only to the group
that was based in Washington and which had a designation of GYP-i.
(¥0//9t) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.6.8, S163287, \"The History of GYP-i.\"
The cryptanalytic or\"Y\" section ofOP-20-G subdivided several times and
its bureaucratic history is quite complex.

82\. (TS//SI) NSAL-5660 CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12, General History
ofOP-20-3-GYP, Appendix 1,7.

83\. ffS//M) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" Ely memorandum 3 October 1942 and attached memoranda
dating to 1 November 1943.





84\. (W/») NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Carapaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" 1 November \*943\> \"Further Remarks on the Proposed
Clinical Attack.\" The quotations are from ibid., L. W. Parke,
\"Clinical Attack on Unknown Cipher System\...\" 23 October, 1943.

85\. (U) Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, U. S. N. (Ret.) etal., And I Was
There: Pearl Harbor and Midway-Breaking the Secrets (New York; William
Morrow and Company, Inc., 1985), 409.

86\. (U) There are some unconfirmed rumors that success was partially due
to the theft of a codebook from a Japanese ship docked in San Francisco.

87\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12., \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP,\" new chpt. V, 6.

88\. fTS/61) Such problems may have led to the search for machines that
would perform Slide Run type dictionary checks.

89\. (T0//S1) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12., \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP,\" new chpt. V, 6. \"the significant reasons for this\"
\[the JN39 error\] \"were three (experience with similar processes in JN
25 show that generalizations are feasible}:\....\"

90\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General History of OP-20-3-GYP,\"

91\. £BS\#gI) \"G\" obtained a badly damaged copy of the machine in
December 1944. NSA AHA ACC 17480 \"Final Report, Project P123, Original
J.N.157 Machine,\" February 1945, OP-20-G-4-D-3E.

92.-\^ NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne \"Use of Hypo on the
JN-157,\" 21 February 1944, gives an insight into how the
general-purpose RAMs were employed to attack Jade. The Hypo was vised to
set the starting positions of Jade\'s three moving stepping switches.
Jade had three moving stepping switches, two immobile ones, and
astecker. ffiSZ/fti) NSA CCH Local Archive, \"Army-Navy Descriptive
Dictionary of Cryptologic Terms,\" Army Security Agency, Februarys 1947.
A machine. Jasmine, whose details seem to have been lost, was built to
test cribs against Jade. Avery primitive electrical and stepping switch
device, Mortor, was quickly constructed to allow hand testing of cribs
to see if crib-plain pairs completed a circuit.

93\. QSSff&f) The first Viper was proposed as soon as it was thought that
Jade might be conquered.

While it was being built, a handy but clumsy \"bombe\" for Jade was
built, the Mortor. It was a cluster of stepping switches and wires to
handtest menus to solve Jade settings. It would be replaced by the
Rattler, a machine described below. (8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Viper,
Plans for Construction of, Steinhardt, L. R.,\" 7 Sept. 1943

94\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General History of OP-20-3-GYF.\"

95\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IVW.L5.12, \"General History of
Op-20-3-GYP.\"

96\. CP0//SQ NSA CCH Series IV. W.1.5.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP.\"

97\. (TS//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History of (NAT) JNA20 CORAL,\"
Vol. Ill, and NSA CCH IV.W.1.5.12, \"General History of OP-20-3-GYP.\"

98\. mffm) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General History of OP-20-3-GYP.\"

99\. CTS//ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History of JNA20 Coral (NAT) Volume
MI.\" 74

100\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" memorandum on \"Personnel inGM-2,\" November 1943
indicates that some significant NAT busts were also discovered by new or
inexperienced personnel. Busts were also important to the entry- into
JN157.

101\. (TB//6I) NSA CCH Series IXW 1.5.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP.\"

102\. OES.) S338 NSA CCH Series XII Z, L.R. Steinhardt, OP-20-G-4a-5, \"A
proposed form of Gypsy\...\" 13 Dec. 1944. NSA CCH XII Z, \"Project
M-312, Gypsy,\" 28 February 1945, NCA, Washington, DC.

103\. W NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Viper, Plans for Construction of,
Steinhardt, L R.,\" 7 Sept. 1943.

104\. (TS//ST) NSA AHA ACC 17480 \"Final Report, Project P123, Original
J.N.157 Machine,\" 28 February 1945, OP-20-G-4-D-3, 5.

105\. (¥5) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Proposal for a Tape Reader on Gypsy,\"
2 April 1945.

106\. (\*S\#SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CBO CIT Paper TS-31, \"TOPAZ,\"
Washington, December, 1945. (T0//0I) On the history ofJNn, NSA CCH
Series IV W.1.5.12, \"General History of OP-20-3-GYP,\" new Chapter ITT,
20.





107\. TS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Inventories of RAM Equipment, 1945. The
first TOPAZ seems to have been completed in March 1945. T?9) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, CBO CIT Paper TS-31, \"TOPAZ,\" Washington, December,
1945, 2. A smaller but similar machine, ASP, had an even shorter life in
1944, when the Japanese changed their callsign systems.

108\. -m NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Phases ofMamba,\" GM-2 6
April 1944.-\^ NSA AHA ACC 26373, \"Inventory of RAM Equipment,\"
January 1945

109\. (TO//S4) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mamba.\" (TO/701) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21
December 1948. (\*}- NSA CCH Series XII Z, RAM list and Conference at
Dayton, 11 April 1945. \$}■ NSA/CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Phases
of Mamba,\" GM-2 6 April 1944.

110\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP,\" Appendix 1,7.

111\. fFS//SI) NSA AHA ACC 543 \"MAC. Outlines \#4, Slide Run Machine.\"

112\. (U) NSA, Lambros D. Callimahos and William F. Friedman, Military
Cryptanalysis, Part II, NSA, 1959, 230-238.

113\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV.W.I.5.13, \"The History of OP-20-GYP-1,
1939-1945,\" 1, points out that the sum of the digits had to equal
three. Divisibility meant without carry.

114\. (T0//0I) OP-20-G did make some other early contributions. A theft
of books had allowed it into the Japanese merchant ship systems from
1929 through the summer of 1941. With the experience gained from that,
reentry into such systems began again during 1942. Throughout the war,
the information from such systems, including those handled by SIS,
proved of great significance to America\'s submarine fleet hi the
Pacific. See (TS//SI) NSA CCH IV.W.1.5.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP,\" newchpt. V, 4-5.

115\. (U) Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, U. S. N. (Ret.) etal., And I Was
There: Pearl Harbor and Midway; Breaking the Secrets (New York: William
Morrow and Company, Inc.), 1985, 409.

116\. (IS\#M) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12, \"General History of
OP-20-3-GYP.\"

117\. (Sf NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. RSteinhardt, \"Additive Machines:
Historical Summary of,\" 27 November 1944.

118\. (£8) f\[4233\] f\[4222\].

119\. tSj NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"Full-Selector,\" 31
October 1942.

120\. m NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-GM J. A. Skinner, \"Proposal for a
Decoding Device,\" 16 February 1942.

121\. \*9) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film I.
C. Machine,\" 8 June 1945 CTS//8fl NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G
\"Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack onJN-37,\" 24 March 1945.
(TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley, \"Preparation of Weighting
Film, Secondary Stage Problem,\" Op-20-G, 2 August 1945- OP-20-G and the
SIS would return to Eastman later in the war with proposals for
sophisticated film-based machines. Two were turned into hardware by
Eastman, the Amber and the 5202, before or close to the end of the war.
They are discussed in the next chapter.

122\. (S)-NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"Additive Machines:
Historical Summary of,\" 27 November 1944. {S) NSA AHA 1505, John N.
Seaman, \"Memorandum for Major Edgerton, Liaison with Navy \# 3, Use of
Ramon Jap Naval Problems of BII Type,\" 9 June 1944. Note that the
Gray-NCR Comparator was also used on the JN25 problem. However, it
performed the required tests very slowly. 48y NSA CCH Series XI E,
Hagelin, Box 2, Folder, \"Comparators.\"

123\. (8) Steinhardt, L. H., \"Copperhead II (Project M-230) Final
Report,\" 9 November 1944. This a fascinating description of the
proposed design. It was to have a long film tape with the text and
additives run against each other. As they did so, the subtraction
process would yield a \"mask.\" The known groups would be on another
long film. As its contents were projected against the mask, photocells
would register how much light passed through. They would trigger
electronic counters which, once reaching a threshold value, would
indicate the position of hits.

124.4& NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"Additive Machines:
Historical Summary of,\" 27 November 1944, indicates that the NCR-built
special desktop electromechanical machine was





a result of the \"additive\" problem design effort. Some sixty of those
Mark IV or \"fruit\" or \"Big Adam\" machines were constructed. Tf\*}-
NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"Additive Theory, Folder IV,
Miscellaneous, Part A,\" 1942-43, gives details on a hand-held system
using IBM cards (6,000 to a set) as stencils to visually identify
divisible by three code-additive combinations. It also contains \"G\'s\"
ideas for other types of additive machinery.

125\. 4ft NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-GH-F, 13 November 1943, Steinhardt,
L. R, \"JN-25 Double Pentagraph High Speed Machine for
Locating.\'\"(S}.NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"Additive Theory,
Folder IV, Miscellaneous, Part A,\" 1942-43, points out that Japanese
errors frequently played a role in allowing \"G\" to recover enough
additives to begin analysis. But it argues that with high-speed
machinery, analysts would no longer have to depend upon them.

126\. (SS) OP-20-G-4-A5, 23 November 1944, L. R. Steinhardt, \"Possible
Engineering Solutions for Full Selector Problems.\" (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series IV.W.1.5.12. \"General History of OP-20-3-GYP,\" New Chpt. Ill,
18, 23. The JNII and JN25 crises also led to proposals for \"quick-fix\"
mechanical devices, See f¥Sr) NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt,
\"JN-11 (George Molecular Attack) Machine Aid For,\" 27 July 1945.




