Chapter 6 (U) Beyond the Bombes and Beyond World War II

\(U) Some of the cryptanalytic emergencies the British and Americans
confronted pushed them to create machines that were close to being
computers; at least the machines contained hints of the great potentials
of electronic calculation. But despite the wish of many of the young
army and navy electrical engineers to \"show their stuff\' and create
the most advanced machines possible, the pace of innovation was
determined by cryptanalytic needs rather than by electronic visions.
\"G\" and \"F\" were arms of operational agencies, not research
organizations. The two groups built some of the most complex electronic
computing machines in the world during the war, but their duty was to
solve problems rather than invent perfect automata. That led them away
from serious consideration of either a universal programmable machine or
a binary-based computer.

\(U) Perhaps that was a wise decision. Those in America who had committed
to an attempt to create universal machines saw their projects yield
quickly outdated technological patchworks. For example, Vannevar Bush\'s
Rockefeller Analyser was a conglomeration of electronic, electrical, and
mechanical components that was put to rest soon after the war ended. The
Harvard-IBM project under Howard Aiken depended upon the craftsman\'s
art of combining IBM card-reading equipment, relays, pulleys, and
shafts. Even the wartime project at the University of Pennsylvania,
which began with a commitment to the use of electronics, ended with a
batch of special-purpose calculation boxes linked by huge cables rather
than by a software program. None of the grand attempts created the
ultra-highspeed and full universal machines that had been hoped for.

\(U) Although OP-20-G and the SIS did not aim for the great prize of a
single computer for

every function, they achieved a great deal. By the time Japan
surrendered, the Americans were building electronic machines using twice
as many tubes as the British Colossus. The advances in electronics at
the cryptanalytic centers were amazing. But in several ways the
Americans\' achievements were limited. The cryptanalytic problems they
solved with digital electronics were not memory dependent, and some of
the new electronic machines they built were based on very clever ways to
make analog technology imitate digital methods. And the new machines
were not true data processors. Although the navy had its Copperheads and
Comparators, large files remained in the domain of the tabulators and
sorters.

\(U) After the Bombe

\(U) In late 1943, just as the first OP-20-G and SIS Bombes were being
completed, another stage in the development of cryptanalytic machines
began. Both American engineering groups returned to a consideration of
digital electronics. At the same time, they began to pay attention to
the Japanese problems.

\(U) The war in the Pacific was an American show, and the cryptanalytic
work was not cluttered with the kind of difficulties that complicated
the European relationships. OP-20-G and SIS had much more freedom, and
the British were more cooperative. Despite the greater independence, the
Pacific never received as much attention from OP-20-G\'s and SIS\'s
machine builders as did the Atlantic. There was no crash program to
develop expensive devices to conquer the Japanese code and cipher
systems. However, the engineers in Washington and Dayton put a great
deal of work into solving problems for the cryptanalysts assigned to the
Asian traffic.





\(U) Most of the work on special machines for the war against Japan was
done in OP-20-G. And much of that was directed by one ofVannevar Bush\'s
ex-students, Lawrence Steinhardt. He had been left in Washington during
1942 and 1943 to design what became the Copperhead tape scanning systems
and to start building very advanced analogs of several different
Japanese encryption machines. He was also charged with the
responsibility for the machines for all major Japanese code systems.

its of computing technology. Mass memory was the key. Lawrence
Steinhardt realized that. After consulting with the OP-20-G
cryptanalysts about what new methods they wished to implement, he
returned to his superiors with an estimate of the probable cost for a
code machine. It was high. But he was told that his proposed expenditure
of \$500,000 would be acceptable. That was onehalf of what Madame X had
cost and the price of eleven Bombes. But a solution to problems such as
JN25 was worth many millions of dollars.

\(U) Every Which Way: The Code Challenge Continues

\(U) The Japanese additive code problems challenged OP-20-G\'s
capabilities throughout the war. But there were moments of urgency that
led to bursts of activity with the army\'s and navy\'s engineering
groups. In mid-1944, when there were signs that Japan might begin yet
another series of alterations that might close its most important
systems to the Allies, \"G\" intensified its search for methods and
machines. Lawrence Steinhardt was again detailed to seek out
technological solutions. What he recommended indicates how deeply code
solutions had become dependent on massive data processing.

(TS//6I) The cryptanalysts had no easy ways to solve code and additive
systems. Even the most advanced methods of the time demanded tens of
millions of tests and massive amounts of memory. Probable additives had
to be stripped, the results run against a large dictionary, and a
judgment made as to whether a true code group had been recovered. Then
meaning had to be attached to the clear code. There were no great
mathematical shortcuts for codebreakers. Even the most efficient methods
called for exceptional amounts of labor, or powerful machines, ones that
did not exist in 1944.

-CES//SI) If \"G\" wanted a machine that could go beyond the army\'s
tabulator-relay Slide Run, it would have to ask its engineers to stretch
the lim

(T8//SI) Steinhardt began a survey of technical possibilities for a
machine that would allow \"G\" to employ its various new and more
powerful versions of the additive stripping/high frequency tests or, if
desired, the Jeeping method. This time he did not even bother to
determine if film or even punch tape systems were \"memory\"
possibilities. The sour experience with the earlier Copperheads and the
delays in the Eastman Kodak film-based code device effort led him to
explore other alternatives for the critical highspeed mass memory called
for by the cryptomethods.

(TS//SI)1 Steinhardt evaluated all the technologies used by aspiring
computer builders, including some that would become integral parts of
the first modern computers. He did not discover any ready-made solutions
to the high-speed memory problem, however. Nor could he find an easy
solution to the challenge of constructing the switching system needed to
select memory elements. His frustrations grew when \"G\'s\"
cryptanalysts asked him to focus on a particular problem and to turn one
of their most demanding methods into hardware. They asked him to design
and construct a machine to attack JN25 and to do it within a few weeks.

£TS//0It The machine the cryptanalysts dreamed about for the JN25 code
problems was an ambitious one. What was later called the \"Selector\"
was to read at least 100 enciphered five-digit code groups at a time,
rapidly subtract





either additives or another set of codes, check for divisibility, and
then perform the critical step: compare the resulting clear groups with
a list of scientifically weighted code groups1 (100,000 of them) and
calculate whether or not a statistical threshold had been reached.2 If
the combined \"weight\" scores for the matched groups summed to or
exceeded a specified level, then the device would signal that true
additives might have been found.

(T8//3I) A critical part of the required machine was a method of quickly
changing the scores associated with the \"dictionary\" of code groups.
The cryptanalysts wanted to modify the scores as they learned more about
the system or when they desired to switch the machine from a weighted
frequency to a Jeeping mode.

(j¥S) With those requirements in mind, Steinhardt called upon his past
experience at MIT, talked with his contacts on World War II computer
projects, such as the one at Harvard, and reviewed what he had learned
on earlier OP20-G assignments.

(\^ftr) One of the first options he explored was for what seemed a wild
scheme for a fast memory. Although it had first been proposed as an
alternative to the commutators used on the Bombes, the option was soon
recognized as a significant \"memory\" possibility. It was a primitive
version of what later came to be called the electrostatic storage tube,
a television-like device that used a charged spot to hold a \"bit\" of
information.3

rS} To follow up on the idea, in 1944 \"M\" had begun exploring the
possibilities of a modified oscilloscope. Its beam would be
electronically deflected to any one of several hundred spots on its
face; then small metal patches pasted on the face of its screen could
sense which \"bits\" were active.4

09} By November Steinhardt decided that he had learned enough about the
\"scope\" and other technological possibilities and that he had to begin
construction of a machine. He drew up a list of recommendations. He
reported on six possibilities for a machine for JN25 and its relatives,
ranking them in terms of the probability they could be finished in time
to meet the Japanese code emergencies.

\(U) The Navy\'s Madame X- the Strangest Selector

-(S} Although Steinhardt\'s report mentioned some very advanced
alternatives, such as the oscilloscope memory, it argued for the use of
conservative technologies and architectures. They could \"get the job
done\" and quickly so. As far as the cryptanalytic requirements would
allow, Steinhardt wanted to use sure-fire parts and analog circuitry,
but in a unique combination.

-£S-) Steinhardt proposed a \"telephone exchange\" version of a new type
of \"Selector.\" The first of Steinhardt\'s recommendations was for the
use of a technology the SIS had used in some of its machines, including
Madame X, the new crossbar relays. With them, Steinhardt\'s proposed
Selector had the potential to become one of the most powerful machines
\"G\" or any other computer organization ever built.

(S\> Steinhardt knew about the telephone company\'s advanced relays
before he went to OP-20G. The late 1930s Differential Analyser project
at MIT had used some of the \"crossbar\" systems the Bell engineers had
developed for their switching centers. All the young MIT engineers had
learned of impressive logical powers of the \"bars.\"

{&) The crossbars were miniature switching stations. A crossbar may be
thought of as a square array often horizontal and ten vertical input
positions. The appropriate output is selected at the intersection ofthe
input positions. Ifcrossbars were hooked together, they became powerful

TOP OCOnnV/OOMINTOrcCL TO U3A, AUS, &AN, GBW AND WZUiAl



top ocoranv/ooMiHTy/ng to usa, aus, cam, qbr amo nzu/«i

selectors of electrical pathways. When two crossbars were connected in
tandem, they could trigger the selection of one out of 10,000 switching
paths and do it very rapidly.

tS} Steinhardt applied his knowledge of crossbars to the
code-to-dictionary phase of additive testing. He realized that with the
addition often small relays to a tandem setup of two crossbars, a
five-digit code could be translated, almost instantly, to the electrical
\"address\" of any one of 100,000 locations. If the locations contained
code groups\' \"weights,\" he reasoned, a rapid test for high-frequency
groups might be performed.

t9) His creativity led him much further, to the outline of a unique
memory search methodology. He thought of a way to do what was, for the
time, massively parallel \"look-ups.\" He proposed that 100 of the
crossbar-relay combinations be linked together. That would allow 100
code groups to simultaneously link to their frequency \"weights.\" It
was a brilliant concept. His new Selector would be a parallel processor.

fS\^The crossbar provided the basis for a very reliable and fast digital
memory Selector. But Steinhardt also had to find a practical way to
match calculation speed to the rapid memory search. After examining
electronic digital methods of summing weights and performing threshold
tests for the detection of statistically \"good\" code groups, he
concluded that the most efficient approach was to return to the use of
analog methods and equipment.

\(U) A Wall of Knobs

CS) The cryptanalytical method for the additive code systems dictated a
digital switching system to find locations of values, but it did not
require a digital memory. Taking hold of that opportunity to simplify
his machine, Steinhardt turned to an extension of previous ideas for
building high-speed memories. Electrical components had been suggested
as means of holding constant

values in digital form for input for calculations in various early
precomputers. The army\'s Freak had tried to go beyond that, employing a
twostate version based on condensers to act as a dynamic digital memory.
That had been an ambitious and none-too-happy exercise, however.

(&F When Steinhardt estimated the number of components that would be
required by a digital memory for the weights for 100,000 code groups, he
correctly decided to retreat to an analog memory. If he had chosen an
approach like that in Freak to store values as on-off representations of
numbers, the components for the code Selector\'s memory would total to
the millions. To avoid that, he proposed an alternative that reduced
engineering demands. But even his clever alternative called for a heroic
and complex machine.

-68} The Selector \"memory\" was to be a set of 100,000 variable
resistors, each with an external knob which was to be used to set the
electrical \"weight\" for a code group. Using resistors reduced the
number of components; only one resistor would be needed for each memory
location. But even with one component per memory location, the memory
would be an engineering challenge. The banks of resistors and knobs
would have to stretch across a large room, reaching up to its ceiling.

-\$9 Steinhardts proposed resistor memory would be fast. But, given the
amount of available time and manpower, Steinhardt did not plan to make
it satisfy one of the cryptanalysts\' important specifications. It was
not to be made fully automatic. It would require a great deal of
man-andwoman-power to set the \"weights.\" Whenever a problem changed or
when the cryptanalysts revised their list of weights, the memory would
have to be \"programmed\" by resetting the 100,000 dials.

(\$} When Steinhardt first described the proposed machine option and the
need to set the memory\'s values by hand, his superiors hesitated.


TOP GEQRETf/OOMlNT//nEL TO UGA, AUG, GAN, GBR AMD MZU/X1



Steinhardt admitted that it would take a crew of twenty WAVES a full
duty watch to reset all the resistors. But, he argued, given the
comparative speed and ease of construction of a resistor memory, the
eight- to ten-hour wait before a new problem could be attacked was
reasonable. Given the operating speed of the new Selector, a ten-hour
setup time still left his machine with a major advantage over any other
method of additive attack.5

(&y Steinhardt\'s crossbar-resistor design included another way of
avoiding the size and complexity of digital electronics. The
\"arithmetic\" of the machine\'s \"frequency check\" was to be analog,
like the IC plate machine. One hundred values would be sent in parallel
to a circuit that tested electrical values for \"enough,\" not how many.

ffS//0O- The simplicity of the analog arithmetic circuits helped make
the proposed crossbar machine quite fast and made its construction seem
feasible. If the machine was set to test for only the weights and not
strip the additives, Steinhardt explained, 18,000 of the 100-group tests
could be performed in an hour. That was quite an advance over the
army\'s Slide Run machine and the navy\'s NC4. And, Steinhardt argued,
the machine could be in operation within less than a year because it was
based on known technologies.6 But he also wanted \"G\" to consider other
options.

\(U) Walls of Tubes

tS)-An inherently more attractive alternative, especially to a young
electrical engineer, was to rely upon electronics. Electronic tubes,
whether gas-filled or vacuum, were orders faster than any other digital
technology of the time. Although Steinhardt believed that standard tubes
could not be used for the Selector\'s memory, he thought they might be a
possibility for the switching (selection) process. Therefore, his second
design option for aJN code machine had electronic

switching, but retained the huge resistor \"electrical\" memory.

f9} As part of the JN25 project, Howard Engstrom had asked other \"M\"
engineers to help Steinhardt by making another thorough investigation of
the possibilities of electronic circuits. With an eye on the potential
for finally creating an electronic Bombe, as well as building machines
for the \"weighting\" attack, new tube technologies and circuit designs
were examined.

4£B What they reported was not good. The first depressing news was about
the possibility of building an electronic wheel. The report on an
electronic matrix which could act as a substitute for the Bombe
commutators contained a bleak conclusion. With the two most reliable
digital circuit designs and standard hardware, a twenty-six by
twenty-six matrix demanded over 1,000 tubes. The engineers also reported
little hope for multifunction tubes. The many projects on radically new
designs had not led to vast improvements. The available special tubes
and circuits, such as the strobotron and Duenna circuits, still called
for over 500 tubes per matrix. Asa result, they reported that an
electronic selection matrix seemed an improbability.

{8} The number of tubes and the likely maintenance problems seemed so
great that \"M\'s\" tube experts again turned away from digital
electronics. They thought they had little chance to build an electronic
Bombe before the war was concluded, and they had similar thoughts about
the chances for an electronic JN25 machine.

\"(S) They recommended another analog solution. They pointed to an
esoteric \"frequency conversion\" circuit as an alternative to the
on-off digital designs.7

■(SH-awrence Steinhardt did his own review of digital possibilities
before giving the \"frequency conversion\" idea serious consideration.
He put the electronic matrix report together with his past




top BECMrrocoMiNTf/na. to uqa, auo, qah, gbr amp mum

experience and weighed the advantages of electronic switching for the JN
code problem. He did not like the results of his review, but he had to
accept them.

■fST His first disappointment was over the speed of electronics. He
found that if he used a single matrix of tubes instead of the set of 100
crossbars for switching and selection of weights, the electronic machine
would be only twice as fast as the electric design. It would have to
cycle so many times to find a correct pathway in the memory that its
advantage in raw speed would be vastly reduced. Of course, if the single
tube matrix was replaced with, as in the crossbar design, 100 matrices,
the electronics would make the machine perform not 3,600 tests per hour,
but over 3,000,000.

£S} That made an electronic selector very attractive. But such an
advanced machine would need more than 100,000 tubes. Steinhardt realized
that was too much to ask in the mid-i940S. Tube failures were too
frequent. Based on the average life of standard tubes of the time,
Steinhardt calculated that under the best conditions ten tubes would
cease functioning every hour; by the time they were located and
replaced, at least three more would go bad. That made the full
electronic switch design for the proposed Selector unacceptable.

4\$) Steinhardt\'s concerns about tubes were based upon more than
theoretical calculations. He had direct experience. He had worked with
digital electronics at MIT and on the Duenna project at \"G,\" 8 The
Duenna project had led the navy\'s engineers to many insights on how to
extend tube life. But even with the knowledge that most failures were
caused by turning tube machines on and off, Steinhardt believed that
unless very special types of tubes with extra long life were developed,
3,000 tubes were the limit for an operational machine. And he quite
correctly saw little chance that either long life or suffi

ciently complex multifunction tubes could be developed in time to fight
the Pacific code war.9

\(U) Into the Beyond and the Past, Rooms of Wires and Disks

4\$) Asa result of the disappointments with electronics, Steinhardt took
another look at older technologies. His survey made him more than a bit
pessimistic about building any type of Selector. He had encountered some
discouraging facts about the use of the most reliable of technologies,
standard relays. When he had calculated how many relays would be needed
to select and test the required 100 code groups simultaneously, he was
overwhelmed. Still envisioning the machine\'s memory as the collection
of 100,000 resistors and their knobs, he concluded that even more relays
than electronic tubes would be needed for the selecting system.

6S\> A \"prohibitive\" number would be required and maintenance of such
a machine, he reported, would be as much of a chore as keeping Madame X
running.

\(U) Desperate Options and a Conservative Selector

-(8} Although Steinhardt would eventually recommend the use of crossbars
and resistors, that alternative was not really attractive to him. The
thought of 100,000 resistors for the Selector\'s memory was especially
troubling. So he asked other engineers at OP-20-G and NCR to explore
additional possibilities. Some of the recommended alternatives
approached the bizarre.

6S) There were last-gasp attempts to reintroduce microfilm memory and
suggestions for optically read glass disks.\"\"

{&) There was also a brief revival of the idea of turning automobile
parts into computers. While the commutators on the Bombes were distant
relatives of distributors, the idea for the JN25





machine suggested a much closer relationship between computers and
automobile electrical systems. It was possible, some engineers said, to
create a high-speed switching system (500 operations per second) using
ignition distributor technology.\"

Jg) That suggestion does not seem to have been taken too seriously by
Steinhardt. But another one that seemed to be as far-fetched did capture
his attention. A young \"G\" engineer, Lieutenant Noble, responded with
an idea that became the seed of one the most advanced and unusual
research projects \"G\" undertook during the war.

(S} Noble\'s idea centered upon the new and relatively untried
technology of digital magnetic recording. OP-20-G had magnetic wire
recorders that were used to copy the most important analog intercepts.
Noble believed he could coax them into becoming the basis for a mass
digital memory.

(SJ He thought his proposed magnetic wire scanning devices could
overcome the problems encountered with other moving media such as
microfilm. To provide information at rates matching electronics, they
all required such high transport speeds that they could not be precisely
sensed. Despite all sorts of experiments, film, disk, and tape transport
systems remained relatively slow and problematic.

f\$r) Noble, however, thought that he had found a solution, at least for
wire recording. He thought he could line up one hundred of his
relatively small wire recording devices in such a way that sensing
difficulties would be avoided. In his plan, two of the differenced code
digits would cause the switching system to select the correct recorder;
then a sensor would select the correct weight as the recorder cycled
through its 1,000 values. Because each magnetic recorder held a few
densely packed entries, processing would be very speedy. Resetting
weights would be painless

because the magnetic wires, Noble stated, could be interchanged.12

{8} Fortunately, Steinhardt was not forced to immediately choose among
the many technological alternatives for the Selector. The JN25 problem
had eased somewhat. In addition, the mathematicians at \"M\" found it
impossible to agree on which of their complex weighting schemes should
be employed. As a result, operational cryptanalytic attention shifted to
other high-level Japanese naval systems. That allowed Steinhardt\'s team
to avoid making any hasty technological decisions.

-ffTS//fiI) However, they and the cryptanalysts decided to begin to
build a experimental version of a new Selector. It was to be a limited
four-digit version, almost a bread-board model. The fourdigit version
vastly reduced the potential power and speed of the device and made it
unsuitable for a JN25 attack. But it reduced the number of required
components. That made the use of the inexpensive and reliable simple
relays practical.13

\~t9) The search for a high-speed Selector was not ended, however. JN25
and the intellectual challenge of the Selector problem had captured the
attention of many atOP-20-G, including Howard Engstrom. He gave the
green light to two very adventurous projects. Both tried to push
existing technologies far beyond their limits in an attempt to find the
high-speed memory and circuitry that an operational Full (five-digit)
Selector would need.14

\(U) Walls of Pipes and Tliousands of Dots

\(U) The development of radar during World War II had led to a very
unusual memoiy device, the acoustic or \"sonic\" delay line. The delay
line\'s job was to hold and recycle signals so that a radar operator\'s
display screen could have refreshed and stable images. The \"lines\"
were tubes filled with chemicals. At each end of the tube was a
transducer. An incoming electrical signal was transformed into a pulse
within the tube. The





transducer at the end ofthe tube changed the pulse back into an
electrical signal. The chemical medium within the tube, typically
mercury, circulated while holding the data pulses.

\(U) Unfortunately, delay lines could hold only moderate amounts of data;
they were very temperamental about the amount of heat they were exposed
to; and much about their behavior remained a mystery. But they presented
data at rates several orders faster than other media of the era.

15

fS)- Howard Engstrom, still in search of a capable machine for the
Japanese codes, had decided to take some great chances. With Enigma and
the Fish machines under control, he determined it was safe to assign
some of his most valuable men to work on a delay-line Selector.

(SO One of the rooms at\"G\'s\" Nebraska Avenue center soon had a very
strange appearance. A box full of electronics stood in front of a wall
of metal tubes. The young naval engineers spent weeks trying to gather
the electronic switching system, the chemical delay lines, and the
prototype calculating units into a functioning machine.

\(S) While the group in Washington was on its adventure, something more
technically courageous was taking place within the secret rooms of the
NCML in Dayton. Two of \"M\'s\" brightest engineers had been allowed to
work on a veiy special version of the Selector when they were not busy
with emergencies. Ralph Palmer, the engineer from IBM who later played a
critical role in its computer history, led a team that was attempting to
build a magnetic memory and advanced photooptical Selector.16

(•6} The Palmer-Reid Selector seems a very strange contraption today,
but in the mid-i940s their prototype was seen by visitors to Dayton as
an exciting alternative, partially because it was another attempt to
develop and apply electrostat

ic memory. Their Oscillograph Full Selector had the potential to become
one of the most powerful and fastest of all the RAM machines.

(S-) Their Selector was to consist of 100 magnetic disks (a technology
yet to be born), electronic circuitry, a heat-sensitive printing system,
and ten very special oscilloscopes. The disks were to be divided into
two sets of fifty each, one set for possible additives and the other for
message text. One hundred groups would be on each message disk. The two
sets of disks were to spin in synchrony, then be offset to accomplish a
full overlap test. Advanced electronic circuitry would difference the
two data streams and then select one of the ten oscilloscopes. Those ten
\"memories\" were to hold the 100,000 code weight entries.\*7

-fS)The electronic circuits of \"Palmer\'s special project\" would,
through a coordinate system, select one of the 10,000 spots on the face
of the proper oscilloscope, then turn processing over to an analog
system.

-4S}-The electrostatic storage was to be very smart. Each of the
screen\'s dots was to have one of a number of possible densities
representing the assigned weight for each code group. To register a
score, the oscilloscope was then to be imaged onto a photographic mask.
The amount of light passing through the mask would be proportional to
the code\'s weight. A photocell system would sense the amount of light
and then throw a particular amount of current to a condenser. When all
the groups in an overlap had been tested, the amount of charge on the
condenser would serve as a measure of the probability that correct
additives had been located.

4\$}-Another subsystem in Palmer\'s Selector was to be used to dump a
charge onto a \"master\" condenser and, at the same time, 200 others.
Each of those 200 was a \"memory\" for the goodness of each of the
possible overlap tests. The amount of the charge on each of the
condensers would determine how long its particular associat


TOP GCOnCTOOOMlNTOREL TO UGA, AUG, QAH, GBR AND HZL//X1


TOP 8EeRET«lUMINT//REL III USA, AUb, LAN, U\>K ANU NZUIAI

ed printing head would rest on the teledotos paper in the Selector\'s
printer. The greater the charge, the longer the print line.

-(Sf Palmer did not complete his machine before he returned to IBM to
lead many of its computer projects, including its magnetic \"tape
processing\" developments. But his Selector project was not wasted. His
experiments with magnetic disks provided a basis for the navy\'s pivotal
magnetic recording development projects after the war.

\(U) The Relay Selector Gets an Electronic Face L\\ft

-£ES-) While the delay line and oscilloscope designs were being drafted,
the final design and construction phases of the safe-and-sure simple
relay Selector continued. But as the machine\'s design progressed, the
commitment to a pure relay technology or to relay switching with a
resistor memory dissolved. The engineers wanted to experiment, and they
were allowed to do so as the Pacific war was ending. The Selector became
a conglomeration of old and new technologies. Within a few years after
the war, it had grown to be, like Madame X, a room full of relay banks
and plugboards, but it had a special addition, digital electronic
components.

•£S8}The shift to the use of some digital electronics came as a result
of an increased trust in the technology and a realization that a pure
relay machine would be too slow. But the Mercury Full Selector of June
1945 was neither a showpiece electronic device nor an example of
advanced engineering imagination. Mercury did move away from analog
calculation, but it was relatively slow, and it continued in the OP-20-G
tradition of using the least resistant technological combinations.
However, it was hoped that the machine and the cryptanalytic method it
embodied would justify building a fully electronic version.18

(TS//SI) When Mercury first appeared, it was a quite impressive
seven-foot high by fourteenfoot-long bank of relays that was served by
two cabinets of electronics. It grew even larger. Within a few years it
approached the size of Madame X. Its expansion was due to postwar
operational cryptanalytic needs and the continued reluctance to build an
electronic code Selector. The number of Mercury\'s relay banks was
increased tenfold in order to turn it back into a five-digit machine and
to expand its dictionary of stored code weights to the required 100,000
values.

gES//0f) The front end of the mid-1945 Selector was quite conventional.
An IBM collating machine with its two card readers was the input device.
Code and possible additive were read in simultaneously, one value on
each card plus an identification sequence. The readers were not
exceptionally fast. In fact, descriptions of the machine bemoaned the
Selector\'s slowness because of the low speed of the collator.

CT0//C1J The next part of the machine was a bit more innovative, but it
was a mixture of the old and new. The pulses from the card reader were
passed to eighty gas-filled tubes. But they were connected to a small
relay matrix that was, in turn, connected to familiar plugboard
matrices. They were called upon when false addition or subtraction was
needed for additive stripping.

(T0//0I) The number that emerged from the plugboard then entered a
tree-like structure of some 1,000 relays. That was the \"selector\" in
the system. The relay system then passed the code value to a true
technology throwback, a bank of plugboards with 10,000 entry points. The
plugboard banks were Mercury\'s \"memory.\"

£ES//£ff) Each of those points was in turn connected by a plug wire to
one of twenty \"weight\" relays. Eveiy time the profile of weights
changed, the engineers had to rewire those connections. Each known code
group had a value from zero to





::: {style="width: 76.94117647058823%;"}
:::

nineteen associated with it. Despite some tricks that reduced the number
of code values that had to be plugged in t change of w \'ng \< as a
massive job that took several days o effort. Pes haps the difficulty of
the plugging was one reason why the 1945 Mercury was restricted to a
memory of only ten thousand \"weights.\" But the replugging was probably
less ime-consuming overall than trying to maintain and change a
condenser type of memory.l9

(TS//SI) Some parts of Mercury were technologically up to date. After
the weights left the relays, Mercury began to be something of an
electronic digital processor. Tnside one of its cabinets was a large
electronic ring counter (something quite like what Bush had used in his
Comparator) that summed the digital values that were \"selected\" by the
suspected plain codes. Next to that counter was another one quite like
it, but the \"threshold\" digital electronic component was unusual for a
\"G\" machine. With the aid of a plugboard and a rotary switch, the
second \~ing count

er could calculate a simple regression equation (Y - a -\>- bx). The
resulting value, which changed as each card was read, served as a
benchmark for a test of significance of the accumulated weights. The
parameters of the equation were usually set to the average weight value
of accumulated messages.20

CIS//SI) A third set of electronic tubes, called the \"overlap
counter,\" counted the number of weights sent to the accumulator during
a run.21

(TO//31) When the electronic evaluation unit that stood between the
accumulator, the overlap counter, and the regression unit was activated
(it could be set to check the results after every card was read),
Mercury became a \"smart\" machine. The machine itself decided what was
or was not a set of probable additives. If the accumulatoroverlap
balance did not match the value in the comparison unit, no results would
be printed. The machine might also be ordered to automati





cally run a new set of cards that had been stacked in back of the first
deck.22

t\*!3//0I}- The postwar Mercury, although an ugly kludge, proved useful
to the navy for almost half a decade. It was used for cipher vs cipher
attacks and was even coaxed into becoming a version of the old Gee
Whizzer. It could be made to test for the frequency of digraphs and thus
give insights into transposition systems.23

\(U) The Biggest Snakes of All - The Navy Almost Builds cm Electronic
Bombe

\(U) While the \"M\" group at OP-20-G continued to search for machines to
breach the Japanese code systems in 1944 and 1945, they and Friedman\'s
crew had to respond to new challenges posed by the enciphering machines
of the Axis powers. Germany threw the most curves at the cryptanalysts
in Washington, but the Japanese also made changes in their systems that
led to a search for new RAM.

\(U) The complex analogs of the Japanese cipher machines that \"G\"
constructed during 1943 had proved very helpful, but they were not
analytic machines. They essentially were decryptors, machines to be used
after a system had been solved. The cryptanalysts wanted more: a machine
to attack the systems, especially the JN157 enciphering device, Jade.

(■T0//8I) Busts and other operator errors had

led to a general knowledge of the machine, to the ability to guess daily
\"wheel\" orders and stecker settings, and, by late 1943, even to the
discovery of the wiring of its stepping switches.

(TS//SI) All that presented a tantalizing opportunity for analysts such
as Frank Raven and Lieutenant Braun, but also frustration. They still
had to find the starting positions of the important parts of the machine
in order to read the Jade messages. The task was formidable. In its
worst moments \"G\" thought it might have to explore as

many as 10,000,000 to 30,000,000 possibilities for each daily \"system\"
even though its attack was based upon cribbing.24

£B)//Dr) That demanded too much of the tabulators, even of the NC
machines. So Lawrence Steinhardt was asked to devise a \"Grenade\" for
the Japanese cipher machines, or at least one for the stubborn JN157.

\(U) He quickly chose a name for the proposed machine. He called it
\"Rattler.\" But it took some time before the architecture and hardware
of Rattler were selected. There were many twists and turns before
Rattler became an electronic version of a \"bombe,\" at least a bombe
for the Japanese stepping-switch problems.

(TS//SI) Because of the pressure to deliver a machine as soon as
possible, Steinhardt at first wanted the NCR group assigned to build
Rattler to use standard technologies. He wrote Joe Desch in early 1944
recommending that Rattler was to be \"entirely nonoptical and
non-electronic in character.\" Although it was to have old-fashioned
components, Steinhardt thought it could perform the required minimum of
10,000,000 tests within eleven minutes.25 Calling on in-hand technology
had a greater benefit. By using the electromechanical stepping switches
from Viper and some relays and plugboards, Steinhardt thought a Rattler
that tested a short crib against cipher could be in operation within
three weeks.

\(U) But some disadvantages to using old components surfaced and the
construction of Rattler was delayed. The drawback to the first proposal
was that it called for the coordination of 108 electromechanical
stepping switches. Joe Desch thought that a bit too much too ask. He
also wondered if the stepping switches could be made to work as fast as
Steinhardt imagined. After reviewing the first design with Desch,
Steinhardt also had doubts. So he approved delaying the project while
other options were explored.





\(U) After two very tension-filled days, Steinhardt presented another
design. It was even more committed to old, trustworthy technology.26
Steinhardt\'s second design was also driven by the need to deliver a
machine to the eryptanalysts within a few weeks.

\(U) He had thought of a handy alternative to the stepping switches. As a
substitute for at least some ofthem, Steinhardt suggested that Desch
develop what Howard Aiken had used on his Harvard-IBM protocomputer, a
very high-speed tape version of the IBM card.

\(U) Using the uncut IBM paper stock as the input medium and six slightly
modified versions of the readers from IBM sorting machines, it would be
possible, Steinhardt claimed, to eliminate most of the stepping switches
and perform the crib tests in perhaps half the time the first design
required. The six input tapes would be representations of the letter
developments of the crib letters.

\(U) Joe Desch considered the second proposal and quickly responded with
a long list of objections and alternatives. Asa result, the Rattler
became something much more technically advanced than anyone had imagined
a few weeks before. But as a result of Desch\'s recommendations, it took
an additional half year to turn Rattler into an operational machine.

\(U) The Rattler that emerged was very, very different from Steinhardt\'s
early conceptions. Rattler became one of the most advanced electronic
machines of the SIGINT war. The necessity for speed drove Steinhardt and
Desch to take the risk of relying on electronics.

\(U) The electronics needed for the JN157 problem was much less demanding
than for the Enigma, however. The critical component of Japan\'s Jade
machine was a telephone stepping switch which had, almost, twenty-six
possible positions. Its electronic analog needed the same

number of \"positions.\" An Enigma wheel was a much more complex
mechanism to imitate. To mimic it called for a matrix of over 670
\"positions\" and allied circuits. That meant approximately 1,000 tubes
to imitate an \"E\" commutator.

CfS//3f) The limited number of tubes needed to imitate a stepping switch
allowed Desch and Steinhardt to think that an electronic Jade \"bombe\"
was a possibility. With faith in their ability to build electronic
\"rings\" because of their previous work on the counting circuits of the
Comparators, they began to design a minimal version of an electronic
crib tester. Electronics was used where essential, but some of the
oldest technologies were incorporated when they proved most efficient.

(TS//SI) The Rattler that appeared in May 1944 was an electronic
stepping-switch version of a very, very fast crib testing bombe. But it
was limited in function, as were the Enigma Bombe\'s Grenades. In
addition to demanding a known wheel order, Rattler needed to be told
what \"stecker\" had been used. It did not have a diagonal board test as
did the Bombes.

\(U) Rattler had at least 1,000 tubes. Its heart was six banks of
electronic stepping switches (ring counters) which were analogs of the
electromechanical versions used by the Japanese. There was another
electronic component, the large cabinet of detector circuitry used to
identify a hit.

fflj//GI) A huge bank of lights allowed the machine\'s operator to see
the positions of the various stepping switches when crib matched cipher
text.27 Rattler had other technological throwbacks. The electronic
switches fed into banks of relays, and much of the setup of the machine
was done through rows of plugboards. Twenty-five of them were used for
the final \"switching\" function of the two \"fixed\" steppers in Jade.

\(U) Rattler was a technical and operational success. It was able to run
through all the posi




\*r-ee\*-AHa-N2tffle

::: {style="width: 73.7749901999216%;"}
:::

tions of the switches and test for a crib-cipher match in ten minutes.
It proved so valuable that a second model was built and modifications
soon allowed Rattler to be used to attack other Japanese cipher machine
systems.

\(U) But Rattier did not turn out to be as small as Lawrence Steinhardt
had promised. In fact, it was a giant; it was seven feet high and nine
feet long.28 However, it was puny when compared to two other machines
Lawrence Steinhardt began to pursue during late 1944.

\(U) The Serpent and Friends

\(U) Lawrence Steinhardt had been frustrated throughout the war by having
to continually react to emergencies. He became tired of hastily building
machines he saw as crypto and engineering compromises. Like his
ex-mentor, Vannevar

Bush, he felt that the navy should have a stock of a few types of fast
and versatile machines that were suitable for the full range of
cryptanalytic challenges.

\(U) In 1944 Steinhardt was able to spend some time on that concept; by
the end of the year he had a proposal for a machine that would surpass
the Comparator\'s ability to attack many different types of problems. He
called his all-purpose machine \"Serpent.\"

\(U) The Serpent would have been a great surprise and a disappointment to
Vannevar Bush: it turned against his favored technologies and favored
reliability and flexibility over speed. Worse, it was to be centered on
IBM components. Steinhardt openly declared that photoelectric
technologies were too temperamental and micro

TOP 0CCRCT//GOM1NTORCL TO UCA, AUG, CAM, GiR AMP UXUOU




film too demanding, at least for a machine that needed many simultaneous
inputs.29

fS} Serpent was to have at least thirty-two input stations. Each would
read the \"tapes\" made of uncut IBM tabulator card-stock formed into an
\"endless\" IBM card. The reading heads were to each have eighty brushes
so that each hole in the \"tape\" could be read simultaneously. In each
of the reading stations, as many as 100 of the heads could be
installed,. How many were to be active at one time was to depend upon
the cryptanalytic problem.

(\$Hn addition to the thiity or more loo-level reading stations, at
least two more would be available for multitape operations such as done
on the Comparator.30

(S-) A control system was to allow the tapes to be driven synchronously,
or in any of the Comparator motions (stepping-sliding), or in such a
manner as to imitate a matrix. The varied stepping would allow Serpent
to have many uses. It could be a Copperhead or a Comparator or a Bombe
or a Rattler or an IC machine - or even a Tessie.

\(U) Steinhardt\'s Serpent rejected more than photoelectric reading
technology and microfilm. He did not want to bother with electronic
counting, either analog or digital. Because the machine\'s input was
relatively slow, the rate of an IBM sorter, there was little need to
bother with the pesky tubes. Rather, Steinhardt recommended that a set
of relay boxes be constructed. Each would perform, like the SIS IBM
machines, a particular set of functions.

\(U) Steinhardt admitted that Serpent would not be able to perform some
attacks as fast as the advanced photoelectric RAM, but its chameleonlike
quality would, he claimed, more than compensate. It would, he said, be a
perfect type of machine for research and for the postwar era when
emergencies no longer drove OP-20-G.

{&) In some cases, he said, it could compete as an operational machine.
While Serpent would take three or four hours to do a full four-wheel
Enigma run (compared to twenty minutes on the Bombes), it would,
according to Steinhardt\'s calculations, be as fast as the electronic
Rattler on the Jade and Coral problems. As well, he said, Serpent would
be as fast as most of the photooptical machines, at least the ones that
used punch tape or photoplates. When the time needed for photoprocessing
was taken into account, Steinhardt claimed, Serpent would be as
efficient as the microfilm Tessie and Hypo.

(■S/Z\'Sf)11 But competing with those two machines was not important to
Steinhardt; he and others had concluded something that would have
offended Stanford Hooper: \"The cryptographic value of polygraphs and
f.C. runs .. .is now admittedly open to question.\" 31 The significance
of Serpent would belts ability to quickly test out such cryptanalytic
applications to see if they were worthwhile. Serpent would prevent
investing in costly special-purpose machines, ones that had little
payoff.

(S//SI) Steinhardt concluded his report on the proposed Serpent with
some very prophetic advice: Serpent would be needed for the navy\'s next
great challenge, the Russian code and cipher systems.311

\(U) Lawrence Steinhardt\'s suggestion for the IBM Serpent was not
followed through, although he continued to work on it and the design for
the electromechanical counting machine that became the postwar monster,
Alcatraz. Importantly, he was returning to the fold of the believers in
electronics; he had begun work on an all-electronic ciphering machine,
just as his colleagues were again forced to try to overcome the
weaknesses of digital electronic components.33


top cr:oncTOGQMiNT;/ncL to uga, aug, gam, gor and hzu



\(U) The Revenge of the Enigma - or Electronics Is Inescapable

\(U) Although OP-20-G and the SIS turned to the Pacific after 1943, the
Enigma problem returned to plague them. Actual and feared changes to the
Allies\' old nemesis were what drove the army and navy to commit massive
resources to solving the problems of large-scale electronic systems.

(T0//0I) The alterations to the Enigmas and their operational systems,
especially the Luftwaffe\'s decision to make its reflector\'s wiring
\"pluggable,\" demanded so many tests that only electronics could
perform the attack. The \"reflector\" problem of 1945 forced the
development of devices that came close to being electronic Bombes.

£ES\#8f) At first it appeared that even the best technology could not
overcome the new Enigma threat. Fortunately, a cryptanalytic attack on
the changeable reflector was created that did not demand a fully
electronic version of the Bombe; that would have been an impossible goal
for the army, the navy, or the British. But the Duenna, the
Superscritcher, and the Giant machines they constructed for the problem
were \"the\" electronic cryptanalytic devices of World War II. They went
far beyond the Comparators or even Rattler.34

(•TO//3f) But the electronic solution was a long time coming. The
Americans did not leap from Joe Desch\'s electromechanical Bombes and
Madame X to electronic machines. They tried to conquer \"E\" operational
changes and then the \"reflector\" problem with traditional
technologies. OP-20-G made several alterations to the original Bombe
design before it accepted the necessity of the electronic Duenna, and
the SIS built a huge new relay machine before it started building its
electronic Scritcher.35

\(U) OP-20-G\'s changes to the Bombes were evolutionary. The first major
ones came after the

British made an emergency request for an additional set of American
Bombes, at least fifty of them. Joe Desch took the request as an
opportunity to improve the standard \#530 Bombes. He produced some two
dozen of the new \# 1530s in 1944. They used :he same logic and
technology as the 1943 machines, and they ran at the same speed as the
\#530s, but were mechanically stronger and had additional circuitry to
eliminate false stops.36

(TS//SI) However, even before Desch made those significant technical
improvements in the original Bombes, he began constructing the \"Fire
Engines.\" Those eight machines were the same as the original Bombes
except that the vertical order ofthe commutators was \"inverted.\" The
fast wheel on the Enigma became the slow wheel on the Fire Engine, and
the slow wheel on the Enigma was in the fast position in the Bombe.
Nothing else was significantly different from the \#530s. But the
\"inversion\" was powerful. It allowed quicker runs when the identity
ofthe fast wheel was known, and, more importantly, it allowed what were
called \"hoppities\" runs during which the operators could stop the
machine, then advance a wheel one step by hand.

(■TG//DP) That cumbersome process was necessary because the Bombes were
unable to automatically imitate the turnover action ofthe \"E\" wheels.
When Enigma wheels reached a certain position, they \"kicked\" the
adjoining wheel one or more steps ahead, thus breaking the regular
metric motion ofthe Enigma.37 The Fire Engine \"hoppity\" method was
very crude, but very helpful. It allowed the use of weak menus and ones
which travelled over probable turnover positions.

(TS//SI) A more complex extension ofthe commutator Bombe was Grandad,
the double unit Bombe. It had thirty-two, not just sixteen, \"E\"s
linked together. The use of twice as many \"E\" units in Grandad
decreased the probability that an incorrect setting would result in a
\"hit.\" Arriving in Washington in late 1944, Grandad




lUFbblKfclJ/CUIVIINIUKfaL IUU5A, AU&, IAN, OBR ANP WZU/XI

permitted the use of much weaker cribs than demanded by either the
regular or the inverted Bombes. It was designed to find solutions when a
set of short indicators was used as the crib, when there were unknown
stecker connections, or when the crib consisted only of cipher letters
that were known to represent the same plaintext letters.

\(U) Beyond Cribs; the Statistical Bombe

\(U) The most ambitious revamping ofthe Desch Bombe was the Bulldozer.
Delivered in early 1945, it had been desired, if not planned, since the
navy first accepted the commutator Bombe in late 1942. It was a
mechanical answer, and a very clever one, to the demands that \*G\" move
towards a pure attack on \"E,\"

(■Sf/Sf) Although everyone at OP-20-G had to accept using a crib-based
method against Enigma, many argued for a continued search for a \"pure\"
attack. Some were committed to statistical analysis out of professional
pride; others cautioned against the danger of depending upon Britain for
cribs. They warned that if the Germans tightened their security, even
GC&CS could not supply what the standard Bombes needed.39

£jSjf\$T) In early 1943, a search for what was generically called a
\"statistical\" solution was begun, but it was a very limited effort.4\"
There was too much else to do to allow anyone within \"G\" to focus on
an abstract problem. But when there were hints in summer 1944 that the
Allies might not be able to count on gcod cribs in the future, more
resources were poured into developing a machine for something very
radical: a cipher-only attack.41

(TS//6F) Because at least a prototype machine

was desired as soon as possible, Joe Desch\'s crew was asked to see if a
regular Bombe could be turned into a \"statistical machine.\" It took
some time to refine the method and to revamp the Bombes, but a Bombe to
identify German plain

language became operational in March 1945. It was called Bulldozer
because ofthe mechanical power a cipher-only attack demanded.

■£TS//£rF) The impressive Bulldozer was a cross between the hardware of
a double Bombe (Grandad), the logic of a Mercury Selector, and the
electronic analog circuits of an IC machine. Although it used a somewhat
less mechanically demanding \"recognition\" method than did Mercury,
Bulldozer\'s power to identify probable plain text was significant.

(3S//ST) Much energy had gone into devising the algorithms that had to
be built into a crib-free Bombe. Hundreds of hours were put into the
analysis of German military language. And \"G\'s\" best mathematicians
spent weeks integrating those findings with probability studies to
arrive at Bulldozer\'s test for the appearance of plain text.42

gF&//0I) The method finally embodied in Bulldozer demanded much that was
new. Bulldozer\'s test began with the entry ofthe intercepted cipher.
Then the machine\'s wheels were spun. At each position, the letters that
emerged from the wheels were electrically weighted and summed. Next, a
comparison was made as to whether the square ofthe weighted frequencies
of each letter summed to equal or exceed a value that was typical of
good plaintext messages.43

6R3//3flrThe earlier statistical studies had determined that Bulldozer
needed along crib to be able to differentiate random text from true
\"language.\" Thus, the machine was, like Grandad, a double Bombe. To
give the new machine additional power to tell order from chance, its
thirtytwo double banks of four-wheel \"E\" units could be changed into
sixty-four single units to accommodate a longer cipher. Bulldozer was
also like the Fire Engine: its banks were inverted. That was to help
make \"hoppity\" type runs. Significantly, unlike the other Bombes,
Bulldozer did not have a diagonal board.\"




\\W SECRnWCOWttflWJCt J»W«\^-A«9r9iV4\^»»ANs?4aU\*U

\<iD//ar )

Bulldozer Boiribe to iiiiiLify German

plain language

::: {style="width: 67.52941176470588%;"}
:::

4TQ//3T) Bulldozer called on electronics as well as electromechanics.
After the cipher had been set on the machine\'s dials, all the letters
that emerged from the commutators were sent to a small bank of
twenty-six tubes. They stored the accumulated electrical weight for each
letter. Before any of the wheels were moved, the value in each tube was
squared and passed to an analog summing circuit. When the combined value
of the output from the commutators at a particular setting exceeded the
assigned threshold value, the machine stopped and then did something
quite different from the other Bombes: it printed out the full text of
the deciphered crib on a Letterwriter typewriter.

(TG//0I)- Bulldozer\'s pure attack took more time than a crib vs cipher
one. At its very best, it took twice as long to run a grenade test. That
was because its motor was set at one-half the typical speed of the
Bombes. That limitation was compounded by the nature of Bulldozer\'s
tests. When the frequency weighting system confronted an

uncooperative cipher, the machine might stop and type out probable clear
text so frequently that its running time increased to as much as eight
times that of the regular Bombes. That was one reason it was rarely used
for more than a grenade run to establish starting points after all the
other Enigma settings had been discovered.

G£S//Sf) Full Bombe runs were much more forbidding. Given the special
assumptions that had to be made about the stecker in a full run,
Bulldozer might have to make as many as twentysix separate four-hour
runs to produce a solution.45

(TS//0I) Although it probably never broke an Enigma system, the
cryptanalysts were quite impressed with Bulldozer. Its weighted test
seemed so promising for the future that \"G\'s\" cryptanalysts informed
OP-20 that a Bulldozer attack might well make the navy\'s own advanced
cipher machine, the ECM, vulnerable. Bulldozer





seemed so able that \"G\" did not tell the British about its powers
until well after the war.46

\(U) No Escaping Electronics, Enigma Meets the Cobra

\(U) It was not a fear of what the Germans might possibly do with Enigma
in the future but a true emergency that finally drove the army and
navy\'s cryptoservices to take a chance on largescale electronic
machines. The emergency arose in 1944. It was the German air force\'s
change in the internal workings of its three-wheel Enigma.

(TS//SI) Fortunately, the Germans had given the British codemen some
hints in late 1943 that the Luftwaffe was going to switch to the use of
a pluggable reflector. That had caused a great deal ofworry. Somewhat
later, when the British learned the German Army was to do the same,
worry turned into near panic.

(T3//3I)1 The new reversing wheel was a major threat. With the pluggable
reflector, any letter could be quickly rewired to produce any other
letter. Although the new reflector was stationary once it was placed
within an Enigma, its ability to be any possible wheel made it worse
than the fourth wheel in the M4. It called for examining an additional
150,000,000,000,000 possibilities when attacking the air force\'s and
army\'s \"three wheel\" machines.

ffig//S9 The challenge was daunting, and

there were some thoughts of not even attempting to conquer the pluggable
wheel. But when it was learned that the Germans would alter the wheel\'s
wiring on a ten-day cycle, not every day or with every message, a
decision was made to face the problem.47

(■EfyfSQ The British were the first to attack the new wheel. They did
the best they could against the German communications subsystems which
employed the new reflector, but the challenge was too much for their
limited resources.

Under the best conditions, it took five top Bletchley Park
mathematicians two weeks of \"hibernation\" to get a solution to a
single rewiring. The most powerful of the British Bombes were of little
help. A slightly modified one took sixteen days for a simple problem,
and the more elaborate Giant took three to four weeks to complete a full
menu. That meant that Luftwaffe traffic could no longer provide much
important tactical information. That traffic had become vital to the
Allies. With the end of the Uboat war and the retreat of the German army
into the homeland where messages were carried by cables, air force
transmissions were a prime source of radio intelligence.48

(T3//3I) A technological solution was required. But in mid-1944 the
British were tired and stripped of resources; they needed help. Unlike
the situation in 1942, they did not hesitate to inform their American
cousins of the new danger and of possible methods of solution. The navy
was notified of the \"scritcher\" test, then the army. Both American
agencies immediately got to work trying to turn the probability-based
scritcher method into hardware.

\(U) The Navy\'s Duenna

(TS//SJJ The navy\'s first thought was to make another simple
modification of the commutator Bombes. It was to be called \"Mona.\"
Mona was to have just one traditional Bombe wheel. The rest of the Bombe
was to test the huge number of assumptions needed to try to identify the
reflector wiring and the stecker pluggings. Mona quickly proved itself
incompetent.50

(3S//SI) More thought went into the method and possible machines. After
modifying one of the Enigma analogs at \"G\" by adding the \"Cobra,\" an
attachment that allowed the analysts to change the reflector wrings by
hand, \"G\'s\" analysts put the British method through a series of
exploratory tests. Soon, they decided that only a two-wheel test and a
great deal of electronics could do the


■JOB SBCR5TOCOMINT//REI. TO USA, AUS, CAM, GBR AND HZU/X1


::: {style="width: 30.733045864366915%;"}
:::

tTTsscxspownrmt mmA, au&, can, «m mtmtm

\*:\'\\\\\*

::: {style="width: 42.493139945119566%;"}
:::

(TO//DI) Duama

job. Preliminary specifications were drawn in August. Then, very
quickly, the proposed \"Duenna\" was under construction at the NCR
facility.

(TS//3I) Duenna became a twenty-foot-long and eight-foot-high mixture of
a small version of a two-wheel commutator Bombe and a cabinet with over
3,000 advanced electronic tubes. The first Duenna of November 1944 had
to be huge and cutting-edge because of the demands of the scritcher
test; so did its four sisters.51

(TS//SI) One of \"G\'s\" bright young mathematicians, Howard Campaigne,
made important contributions to the logic of scotching. 52 His modified
OP-20-G53 version of the British attack was hardwired into Duenna\'s
complex circuits. It was necessarily a very efficient attack, but it
demanded a great deal. It required as much as a 100-letter menu (cribs
vs cipher pairings in this

case); it worked under the assumption that the slow \"E\" wheel would
not turn over at critical points in the menu; and, unless prior
knowledge allowed \"G\" to avoid it, a full test required as many as
fifty-six separate runs to test all the possible two-wheel combinations.

CES//0JJ Duenna demanded so much because it was expected to work much
harder than the original Bombes. The Bombes were pampered. They were
well fed with known wheel wirings and the reflector plugging and asked
to yield stecker, rotor order, and, with some help, the window setting.
All that Duenna was told was the wheel wirings. Yet it was asked to
produce the same information as a successful Bombe run plus the plugging
pattern of the new reflector.

(TS//SJ-) Duenna\'s job was tough, and it had to be \"smart.\" With the
crib in place, it made an assumption about the stecker setting of two or

top SEencT/feoMiNTrmeL to usa, aus, can, gbr and nzuiai




three high-frequency letters. Then, with its two imitations of the
faster \"E\" wheels, its electronics serially tested the plain-crib
pairs against successive combinations of stecker and reflector
pluggings. Duenna had several electronic versions of steckers and
reflectors to perform those tests.54

(TS//GI) A stecker-reflecter check for a given stecker assumption took
twenty minutes; an average \"run\" took an hour and a half. But the need
to run different wheel combinations to isolate the fast wheel turnovers
called for a day\'s work. The complete set of tests needed for difficult
systems might keep a Duenna busy for two weeks.55

\"links and tacks\" test was passed, Duenna printed the information
about its \"hit\" and went onto search through another stecker
assumption. If the threshold was not met, Duenna skipped the printing
stage and went on to examine another stecker assumption.56

(TI3//31) Although it was a very strange looking combination, Duenna
became a valuable tool. Even before the first model was completed, the
navy ordered that several clones of the original be delivered as soon as
possible. The crew at Dayton wished to build a more elegant machine,
perhaps with electronic wheels, but they followed orders.57

(JS/r\'Sf) Although Duenna had advanced electronics and circuitry, it
might have taken much longer to do its job if the \"scritcher\" test had
not been so inherently intelligent. Other of\'G\'s\" World War IT
machines had hardwired decision algorithms, but Duenna had the most
complex one. Duenna\'s smartness was based on something like the
diagonal board test: it looked for contradictions or impossibilities
given the data and assumptions fed into it. Its intelligence went beyond
the diagonal board\'s, however. Because the searching in Duenna followed
a logical progression, a \"branch\" of a search could be abandoned very
early. The machine did not have to wait until all possibilities had been
examined. That saved enormous amounts of time.

HTt\^/SI) As the machine tested the assumed and, then, the recovered
steckers and reflector links against the crib-plain pairs, it checked
for contradictions as well as building up a \"recovery number.\" The
recovery number was changed with each sweep (step) through the \"E\"
analog, That number was compared with the recovery score from the pre1
ions sweep. If no additional recoveries of compatible steckers and
reflector pluggings had been made, Duenna\'s circuits compared the
ic.ccvery \"buildup\" number with a preset threshold value. Tfthat value
was exceeded, Duenna tested for another critical factor. Ifthat

(S//SI) But there were attempts to persuade \"G\" to allow the creation
of a full electronic Duenna.58 Some looked upon the Duenna project as
the challenge that would force a do-or-die commitment to such electronic
components. But an electronic \"wheel\" again proved too much of a
challenge for its \"E\" wheels.

(TS//SI) What was inside Duenna\'s main cabinet was very different. The
vacuum and gas-filled tube circuits were innovative. There were
highspeed digital counting rings, \"selection\" matrices, electronic
stepping switches, and an electronic version of the conflict-testing
diagonal board system. Duenna\'s critical threshold testing circuit was
very advanced for the era, and the ability to enter the crib via dial
switches saved much set-up time.59 Especially important, the Duennas
proved very ™eliable and maintenance free.

\(U) From Relays to Tubes, Rosen Gets His Chance

CFS//S-B The SIS engineers under Leo Rosen also found the pluggable
reflector problem an exciting challenge. In fact, it was the difficulty
of the problem that led the \"F\" section to become a significant force
in research and development. The pressure on the STS to deliver a
machine to help the British, combined with the decision not


TOP 3ECRET//COMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, EAN, GBR ANU tUUIXl



to hire an outside contractor as had been done with Madame X, gave Rosen
the power to require the army to send him a cadre of bright young
engineers who already had experience in advanced electrical and
electronic engineering. He very quickly built up a remarkable group,
many of whom went onto become important figures in the postwar computer
industry.60

(TS//SI) Rosen had been notified of the pluggable reflector (Uncle Dick)
threat in early 1944. While the SIS cryptanalysts were put to work
scratching by hand methods, he and his close aides, such as Captain C. R
Deeter,61 began a design for a supermachine. Like the navy\'s engineers,
Rosen\'s men thought electronics was the logical route.62 Then they were
forced to weigh engineering ambitions against cryptanalytic needs. The
result was another compromise - the relay Autoscritcher (also known as
Grapevine) of 1944.63 And even its follow-on, the electronic
Superscritcher, had to face up to the limits of digital electronics in
the mid-i940s.

OS//St) Because the German army and air force \"E\" modifications were
the same and because Britain had provided both the American army and
navy with the same crypto-methods for an attack, the logic and
architecture of the SIS\'s device were similar to Duenna\'s. But the
hardware was very different: a longer crib was used, the build-up to a
hit was different, and the test for branching out of a search was
simpler.64 In several ways, the army\'s relay Autoscritcher was more of
a throwback than Duenna, and it was slow: \"running time was as much as
ten to fourteen days, three shifts a day.\" Although it performed
twenty-five tests a second, a single wheel order test took three and one
half hours.65

£ES//Dij The most incongruous part of the Autoscritcher was its
\"wheel\" unit which fulfilled the same function as the rack of
commutators in the Duenna. The army machine had twenty banks oftwo
special Enigma wheels, not commuta

tors. 6 Each served as the moveable fast wheel and as a static
combination of the medium, slow, and reflector wheels. These rotors were
grouped into sets which, along with allied relay circuits and stepping
switches, formed the basis for \"branch\" testing.

CES//ST) To save design and construction time, no automatic stepping
controls for those rotors were included in the Autoscritcher. Given the
length of time it took the machine to search through steckers and to
test for contradictions, it was thought67 hand-turning of the rotors
would be acceptable.

(TS//8f) The Autoscritcher\'s very long crib was entered on a huge
plugboard. Assumptions based on frequent cipher-plain pairs were entered
into the machine. Then a bay of relays and electromechanical stepping
switches serially tried all the possible steckers, passing control to
the two bays of electronic equipment. They included the matrices that
checked for diagonalboard type contradictions. Along chain of cribplain
pairs was used (each with its own rotor pair). An analog threshold test
made the final decision as to whether a \"hit\" had occurred. That test,
however, was not as complex as in the Duenna. And an operator had to
copy the \"hit\" settings by hand.68

\(U) Engineering l\*ride and Peacetime Priorities

(3//3I) The SIS engineers had begun the Autoscritcher as a learning
project. Once they tested out their ideas with its older technology,
they expected to begin the design and construction of an electronic
machine that would be more useful and which would be a source of
engineering pride. The goal was a purely electronic machine that would
be at least one hundred times faster than the Autoscritcher.\" 6\<\*

CES//SH The \"F\" group was given the go-ahead for such a machine in
early 1945.

top GEonnv/ooMimv/ncL to uga, auc, oan, gbr and nzu/xi




The machine soon acquired the name \"Superscritcher.\" Its designers
were thrilled when they realized that it might be as much as 500 times
faster than its relay predecessor.70

(S//8fr) Designing new circuits was exciting for the young engineers
assigned to the \"Super\" project. Although the \"Super\" had the same
architecture as the Autoscritcher, made similar hardwired \"if
decisions, depended upon the plastic and copper \"E\" wheels, and
performed the same type of cryptanalytic test, it was a far different
and more innovative fixed-purpose computer.71 A purely electronic
stepping switch, improved electronic ring counters and circuits \^ and
electronic controls for automatic stepping of the rotors emerged before
VE Day.

Cf&ffQifl The electronics in the \"Super\" were not exclusively digital,
but they were major advances in the state of the art. Over 3,500 tubes
were mounted in eighteen eight-foot-high bays. A large air conditioning
system stood by to protect them and the operators. There even was a
means for printing the settings when a \"hit\" was found.73

(jTOy/g-f) But the \"Super\" was not operable when Germany surrendered,
and the Enigma traffic for which it was designed disappeared. There were
demands that the project be abandoned. Fortunately for the \"F\"
group\'s morale, the commander of Arlington Hall Station decided that
some useful function could be found for a completed machine. He approved
a continuation of the prcjec!. Several stubborn electronic problems were
overcome and the Superscritcher\'s power was turned on in December 1945.
To the surprise of many, it was used on various problems for the next
five years. And it did prove itself to be 500 times faster than the
Autoscritcher.74

\(U) Keeping the Faith; the Return of the Film Machines

\(U) The term \"RAM\" h?d a more precise meaning for some in OP-20-G and
the SIS than

\"high-speed cryptanalytic machines.\" Especially for the army\'s
engineers, RAM meant the type of microfilm and photoelectric machines
that Bush had promised to Admiral Hooper in the 1930s, a series of
machines the SIS group came to want for themselves by 1944. In fact, in
1944 it was the army\'s cryptanalysts, not the navy\'s, who became the
strongest advocates for film-based devices. By then, the navy\'s men in
\"G\" had become a bit wary of both film-related technologies and the
difficulties involved in producing reliable microfilm. The navy had not
abandoned Bush\'s ideas, but it pulled back from Eastman Kodak and
microfilm in 1943. After Icky arrived, the navy did not order any
additional film machines, at least during the war.75 One reason for that
was the last one on its 1942-43 shopping list refused to be turned into
hardware in a timely way.

£¥8} What became known as \"Amber\" did not arrive until late 1945. It
took so long because of the cryptanalytic difficulty of the system Amber
was asked to attack, as well as the stubbornness of microfilm
technologies.

\(V) The Revenge of the Codes, Again

■4TS//&B\' The Japanese JN25. additive code had led to some
desperation-driven technical solutions at\"G.\" The many Copperhead I\'s
searched through thousands of messages in the hopes of finding two
identical cipher groups spaced equally apart in two messages so that the
analysts might be able to identify \"depths\" and go on to break into a
system. The huge and expensive Mercury, with its walls of relays, was
also an example of trying to do the impossible. Thousands upon thousands
of additives were stripped every hour; then its huge memory was searched
for frequent code groups with only a glimmer of hope that a hint of a
possible solution might emerge.

(TS//6I) JN25 was not the only difficult and demanding Japanese additive
code system, however. By the last year of the war, the attempt to





read the JN37 weather code continuously raised more cryptanalytic and
technological frustrations than had the fleet system.

(TS//SI) Reading the combined weather report grew more and more
important to the American navy as it raced towards Japan. The fleet was
moving so fast that American weather stations could not be established
quickly enough. The only good source of critical weather information
about many areas was the Japanese reports. How valuable they were became
tragically evident when one of Admiral Halsey\'s task forces was caught
by a typhoon in December 1944. The storm took almost 800 American
lives.\" ?6 If all the Japanese reports had been read in a timely way,
the disaster might have been avoided.

(TS//SI) JN37 seemed to be the most efficient way to tap the reports. It
was the system the Japanese used to bring together local weather
bulletins, then transmit them as a group. The system was
cryptanalytically strong, but it had a few potentially exploitable
weaknesses. The underlying four-digit numeric code for the system
remained fairly stable throughout the war, and it was known that the
messages were very stereotyped. Cribs and code-meaning identification
were possibilities because temperature, humidity, and wind speed
remained much the same in various areas during a season. That meant a
great deal of repetition of code groups.

(T0//0I) Some JN37 variants had been read. But there was a tough part to
JN37, its superencryption. There were many additives, and they were
frequently changed. With those changes came blackouts, such as those of
1944. In the JN37 version that led to so much pain in that year, the
additive book had 900,000 entries.77

(TS//6I) \"37\" had yielded, at times, to traditional tabulator methods
supported by busts, knowledge of indicators, and captured data. As long
as there were busts and captures, the old methods worked. But even
before the traumas of

1944, there were serious concerns that more frequent changes of the
additive books and alterations of indicators might cause a permanent
lockout.

(TS//SI) In response, in early 1944 Howard Campaigne, one of OP-20-G\'s
bright young mathematicians, began examining the practicality of various
pure attacks against JN37. He sought an attack that did not depend upon
knowing indicators, the additive book, or usual cribs. He experienced
much disappointment. For example, he calculated that an Index of
Coincidence assault with existing equipment would take three years at
three shifts a day for any type of breakthrough. Quite logically, he
suggested a search for better methods and high-speed machines. There was
not much progress.78

CES//3F) Then the cryptanalysts had some good fortune. The discover)\'
of an active JN37 additive book gave some hope that a practical method
could be devised. The capture of the additive book allowed \"G\'s\" best
young mathematicians and analysts to understand the logic of the system
used in 1944 and, among other things, what the probabilities were that
particular code digits would appear in certain positions of messages

79

(ffiY/GI) A quite elaborate theory was developed, one based upon
advanced Bayesian statistical methods. The statistician argued that if
\"G\" was willing to make a very costly investment in calculating the
\"centiban\" weights and creating a machine to apply them, then at least
a minimal but consistent entry into JN37 could be expected. But the
method seemed forbidding. It demanded too much calculation.

(TS//SI) Other, perhaps less cumbersome, methods of attack were
explored, including the dictionary lookup approach of Mercury. But they
stood little chance of producing results. By late 1944 the Bayesian
\"statistical crib\" method of

top occri:tooomint//rcl to uqa, auo, OAN, ODR AND NZU/X1



IOM iJbCKblDlUIVllNUJKbL 10 U&A, AUS, tAN, ODR AND NZU/XI

identifying a code group version of \"plain text\" became the navy\'s
only hope.

(TS//SI) The \"statistical crib\" method was the kind that Hooper and
Wenger wanted as the basis for all of \"G\'s\" work. It would use only
cipher and a \"scientific\" weighting system to pinpoint probable plain
text and then point to additive \"depth.\" From there, additional
machine runs and statistical and craftsmen\'s tests could be applied to
recreate the additive book and to quickly enter a

i •■ So

system.

(TS//SD But in 1944 there was no machine for the \"statistical crib.\"
Although \"G\" had attempted to establish a machine program to make the
statistical methods practical earlier in the war, little had emerged by
the time the JN37 weather code became a priority at \"G.\" The lack of
results was one of the reasons why Wenger, Engstrom, and Meader wanted
their own cryptanalytic machine \"factory.\" They were frustrated by the
slow pace at Eastman Kodak.

CR3//9I) In early 1943 Eastman had been asked to explore possible
technologies for the additive problems. \"G\" had requested film-based
machines for a range of functions. They wanted ones to strip additives,
match plain text to a code dictionary, test for likelihood, perform
statistical weighting, and to print code meanings.81

(T8//SI) Eastman took up the challenge. Ten of the best men in Rochester
were assigned to its new RAM team. They were given a great many
resources and much engineering latitude. They explored many, perhaps too
many, logical and technological alternatives.

(TO//OI) But no new film \"Japanese\" machines emerged from Eastman in
1943 or 1944

\(U) Meanwhile, Lawrence Steinhardt began work on his versions of
additive photoelectric RAMs, calling upon the technical expertise at

Dayton when he needed practical advice. By the time he turned his first
designs into hardware, he had become shy of film. His proposed
punch-tape Copperhead series was the outcome. He laid out ideas for a
wide range of machines, ones to implement the newest code-system
attacks.

(T8//3I) Two of the proposed Copperheads, Mark V and VI, for example,
were aimed at mechanizing weight and dictionary attacks against additive
systems. Projects for them were begun, but their complexity led to their
abandonment. The other designs also proved too complex. Only Copperhead
I, the \"brute force\" matching machine, was made operational. As a
result, \"G\" was left without much in the way of additive RAM
machinery. It was not alone. The army also had ideas of a film machine
for the additive problem, but it gave such a machine low priority before
1945.82

(T9//3I) Thus, when reading JN37 became an imperative for the navy,
there was no hardware in place that seemed able to perform any of the
proposed cryptanalytic attacks, especially the one that seemed best, the
sophisticated but costly \"statistical crib\" method.

t9//D¥) There was another hurried search for a \"37\" machine in 1944.
None of the suggestions seemed reasonable, and none were turned into
projects. The situation seemed hopeless. But at the end of the year, it
was declared that an answer had to be found.

\(U) More Numbers Than Ever Before

(■S/Z-SJ\^A crisis team was put together to try to force a technical
solution. John Howard led the navy group that consulted with the top
engineers at Eastman and NCR. He told them of the requirements of the
new \"statistical crib\" attack. Both groups then reviewed the
technological possibilities.83





(TQ//0I) What Howard gave as the goals for the new RAM was staggering.
But that was inescapable. The Japanese were changing the JN37 additive
book three times a year. To recover the new books, Howard explained,
called for more calculations than \"G\" had ever attempted. The pure
\"Monographic Statistical Method\" required, for example, 500,000,000
very complex comparisons of cipher to \"crib\" to find one correct
line-up (the path to one correct additive). To recover just 10 percent
of the \"37\'s\" additive book within the first half of its four-month
life called for six such searches a day.

Q¥&ffST) The job was more difficult than just looking for raw
coincidences as the original Bush machine had been built to do. The
\"Ideal\" machine John Howard wanted had to perform more than 200
multiplications, summations, and threshold tests for each of the half
billion comparisons made during a run.84 To complete those trillions of
operations six times a day called for something beyond the Bombe,
Mercury, or even Duenna. Howard was calling for a supermachine.

(3S//SQ Even if a technological answer was found, building the
superadditive machine would be a gamble. All the calculation might be
for nothing. The eight weeks of 3,000,000,000 daily comparisons would
yield a useful bit of information only if all elements of JN37 besides
the additives remained stable. If the Japanese made changes besides
issuing anew additive book every four months, the calculations might
prove useless.85

\(U) The gamble had to be made. The \"G\" engineers, NCR\'s men, and the
Eastman group were ordered to look at various technical options and come
up with a solution.

(TS//SI) One alternative was to base a machine on advanced digital
electronic counting/multiplying circuits. When estimates were made ofthe
speed of the best possible vacuum tube machine, the results were
shocking. It was

found that just one run with the electronic digital device would take
sixteen years. When asked if several copies ofthe device could do the
job in a reasonable time, the engineers responded that it would be
impossible just to find the parts needed for enough ofthe machines.86

(TO//DI) Another possibility was to create a new version ofthe proposed
Full-Selector machine. Instead ofthe weights being calculated as the
cipher was scanned, they would be stored in a fast memory and retrieved
for each ofthe possible 60,000 different cipher combinations that were
expected to be encountered during a run. The stored-weight alternative
seemed attractive, but it called for ultrafast memory. Without it, the
stored-weight approach would take as long as the on-the-fly calculations
using electronic digital circuits: years.

(TS//SI) The \"best\" memory technologies, such as delay-lines, seemed
inadequate. So it was decided to go back several steps. The only way to
achieve the needed speed, it seemed, was to rely upon very densely
packed high-speed tapes that carried all the \"weighting information\"
and upon analog and parallel calculations. With the tapes, the machine
would not have to multiply; it would just have to scan, search the
memory, and sum. And, if enough precision could be obtained, speed could
be vastly increased through the use of analog \"counting\" - the machine
would not have to wait while digits were summed, one after the other.

(TS//ST) All that seemed to dictate a return to microfilm and
photoelectric sensing and calculation. But it took many months to agree
upon the exact nature ofthe machine. NCR and Eastman\'s team agreed that
the general microfilm RAM approach should be followed, but there were
significant differences on many details. An important one was whether
the \"weights\" were to be represented by different size spots (the NCR
recommendation) or by degrees of opaqueness.

TOP GCOnCT/ZOOMINTOnCL TO UCA, AUG, GAM, GBR AND NZU/X1




(S//SI) The debate went on far too long. It was not until the summer of
1945 that agreement was reached and the Eastman team\'s approach to what
became known as \"Amber\" was chosen. That did not allow enough time to
create an operational machine. Amber was not to appear until the war had
ended.87

(T0//0I) Eastman\'s proposed Amber was to be a photoelectric comparator,
following in the traditions of Icky and Hypo. It had four scanning
photocells that tested two 70mm repeatedly offset and superimposed films
against a coincidence threshold. It used the familiar analog circuits
but with a sophisticated twist: both positive and negative photosensing
was used.88

(T8//8I) Amber was to have a. relatively large viewing field so that a
long string of code could be tested instantly. It was designed to test
eight hundred characters a second. The long field would give Amber speed
and more. It increased the probability that \"false hits\" wouM be
eliminated. More than that made Amber powerful; it had a very special
way of implementing the weighting methods used to automatically identify
probable \"plaintext.\" The \"dots\" on one of its films represented the
weights through varying densities.

£fiJ//3\"F) Those variable densities called for much to be added to the
older \"dot\" cameras Eastman had made for Icky and Hype. A special card
reader and camera combination was developed. Amber\'s camera was a
sophisticated extension of the light-bank system that had been developed
earlier in the war for machines like Icky. As the weight cards were
read, one of twenty different voltages was applied to the tiny lamps to
achieve the variable densities. Its developers knew that it would be a
major chore to keep the system in tune, but that was inescapable. More
than the camera was demanding. The data were so densely packed that
extra can had tc be taken at every step of film preparat\'er and
development.

(Tfl//3fj In addition, the older analog summing and threshold circuits
had to be revised. But Amber was not to be a completely new machine.
Only the changes to the older Icky and Hypo concepts that were
absolutely necessary were incorporated. Thus, Amber had much of the
crudeness of the Icky. When Amber\'s films were placed in its Icky-like
projector, if enough of the code groups had clear \"dots,\" Amber would
just stop.89

(TS//SJ} Amber\'s design was very demanding. It needed controlled
humidity and correctly monitored ambient lighting. And its film
transports had to be much more precisely adjusted than Icky\'s or
Hypo\'s. One reason for the narrow tolerances was that the very
expensive master films containing the \"weights\" would wear out if
there was the slightest friction.90 Those master films were precious
because they carried the critical \"weights\" that were so labor
intensive and difficult to calculate.

(T3//8I) Amber\'s creators convinced \"G\" there was no alternative but
to accept the great burdens the \"master film\" design required. The
cryptanalysts knew that the preparation of each log-odd weight film
called for millions upon millions of multiplications. Those assigned to
the. job feared they would never be able to keep up with the task.
Although they had the tabs, including a special Multiplier, the job of
preparing the long card decks to feed the special film-generating camera
seemed overwhelming. A short twentythree-character message needed almost
two million multiplications for its weight film.91 It took over 800
hours oftabulator and IBM electromechanical multiplier time to create
atypical deck. And each of the different types of JN37 messages needed
more than a dozen of its own \"probabilities\" films.92 Unfortunately, a
hopedfor emergency project to create an electronic multiplying machine
could not be initiated, and \"G\" had to accept the prospect of
thousands of hours of calculations to prepare for Amber\'s arrival.93
Perhaps it was for the best that Amber was delivered just after the war
with Japan was concluded.





CT3//GJ) Amber did not achieve all the goals set for it in 1945, but it
was eighty times faster than the proposed digital electronic JN37
machine. And it could be modified to perform other than the \"weight\"
test. It did a simple round-robin test of every message in a group
against every other 1,000 times faster than the NCR-Gray Comparators.
But its 800 comparison-a-second rate (the original goal had been 35,000
a second)94 meant that a typical run for the \"37\" attack might have,
at the very least, taken twenty-four hours.95

(TS//SI) Because of Japan\'s defeat, there would be only two Ambers,96
not the twenty Howard Engstrom had sought earlier in the year. Some
remodeling was needed in 1947,97 but the Ambers proved useful into the
1950s.98

\(U) Dr. Bush, Your Best Friend Is Really the Army

(TG//GI) The contract for Amber was not a signal that OP-20-G had
regained its faith in photoelectric machines. Its frustrations with it
and the Gray-NCR Comparator led to a belief that a long development
cycle would be necessary before Bush\'s ideas could be turned into the
powerful and reliable machines Joseph Wenger and Admiral Hooper had
longed for in the mid-i930s. Although \"G\" added an electronic
\"rare-event circuit\" to the Gray Comparators and had Icky refurbished,
it did not return to Eastman or Gray for more machines during the war.99

(6//SI) By 1944 the lack of orders from the navy led Eastman to consider
reassigning most of its RAM team, leaving only the Amber group in
operation.100 Then the army saved the day.

(S\#8B Some of the SIS\'s engineers had become devoted fans of Bush\'s
visions, and by late 1944 they were laying plans for a whole series of
microfilm-electronic RAMs, a series that went beyond what the navy had
once imagined. They even requested a statistical Rapid Selector: a

machine that married microfilm with electronic counting. And by early
1945 their belief in film led to a request that a new camera be
constructed to allow the army\'s Gray-NCR Comparator to become a film
rather than a punched-tape machine. The SIS had experienced so many
problems with the punches that it was searching for any way possible to
prolong the operational life of the Comparator.,Q1

(S//&E) Although it never acquired all that its engineers desired,
somewhat ironically it was the army, not the navy, that fulfilled
Bush\'s dream of a \"statistical\" Rapid Selector. By 1945 the
SISEastman teams put electronic counting together with microfilm. And
they continued on after the war to be the sponsors of the most
far-reaching attempts to create film-based machines for cryptanalysis.

(8//0I)- Friedman\'s team had begun its romance with RAMs in early 1943
when the navy allowed the SIS to piggyback orders for a few machines
onto the navy\'s contracts.loa Close to \$200,000 changed hands very
quickly for the purchase of IC plate devices, atetragraph tester and,
later, a Gray-NCR Comparator. The first purchases were just that,
purchases. The SIS played no role in the design of the machines. But
after the RAMs began to arrive in late 1943, the SIS wanted a more
powerful voice in machine design.

(G//0I) Within less than a year, a subcommittee was formed by those in
\"F\" who had become strong advocates of the film-based devices. Many
ideas for new RAMs emerged. Eastman soon began creating an SIS version
of Hypo (their film Dudbuster) and an upgrade on the Tessie. There were
more ambitious plans. The SIS was developing ideas for a film version of
a Slide Run machine, an Icky for the Fish traffic, and a special type of
Amber. A budget request of \$75,000 for research was approved. In
addition, funds were allocated for the initial development stages of at
least three new machines.




IOH UbCKfcU/lUMINmHfcL 10 USA, AU3, CAM, ODR AND MZUflH

QBfffft) Only one of those proposed machines was constructed, but some
unexpected film RAMs appeared at the SIS during late 1944 and early
1945. \"\*3

(TS//Sf) One of those surprises was the result of lashing together the
army\'s version of the 35mm Icky and the electronic ,v±\~\>leis, used on
the Gray-NCR Comparator. Only one ofthese unnamed machines was built,
but it pleased the SIS analysts and encouraged them to make more
modifications to existing devices. The army\'s Tessie, for example, was
significantly upgraded. It was made more efficient, but, more
importantly, it was made to automatically return to the point on the
films where a sought-after complex code or cipher pattern was located.
Furthermore, a new camera allowed it to use the \"bhckcni\"\" test for
brute-force searches. Later, a rr.:\*re reliable cardto-film converter
was requested.104

\(U) The Great 5202

(TG//0I) While the older RAMs were being updated, Eastman was busy with
the SIS\'s major RAM contribution, the \"5202.\" TV 5° 02 was the
machine for the Fish system that had been recommended in 1944. It became
the mos\" sophisticated and powerful of all the film RAM machines of
World War II and after. In fa?t, the 5202 effort can be considered to be
the major catalyst in keeping Eastman-Kodak together after the war.
Although it was completed and sent to England too late to make its mark
against Germany, the 5202 was used throughout the 1940s,\<\>5 and was
used to attack the German Tunny \^ciphering machine.

CCS//SI\^ Among the 5202\'s 1 danced features was its much-improved
camera system. It took the light-bank principle far beyond the previous
versions. Very important, it could pack the patterns generated by
analogs of encryption machines much more densely than earlier models. As
important, the circuits al\'ieri with the pattern gene-ators allowed
great flexibility in select

ing the data transmitted to the camera. Creating complementary code
patterns, for example, was very easy. The camera system went far towards
solving a major problem of all the older film systems: the great amount
of time it took to generate the films.106

ffSf/S-Q The 5202\'s heart, its reader, was also a technical improvement
over the previous Eastman RAMs. Optics were improved In combination with
the dense packing on the films, the improved sensing systems allowed ten
times the number of characters to be tested at once as on the other film
RAM. The 5202\'s span ofsoo columns was impressive. That made 5202 a
more robust cryptanalytic aid than the other RAMs with their relatively
short viewing gates.

(TS//SI) The 5202 was also versatile. It could

be used to \"locate\" desired patterns as well as to make
Comparator-like counts on its electronic banks. It could hold as many as
four films at a time; two of those were motor driven. Furthermore, its
drive mechanisms were extremely fast and could step films in many
different patterns.

\<-¥G/f9f) The unique feature of the 5202 that gave it the potential to
be as valuable as the British Robinsons or Colossi was its ability to
test two fields of data at the same time. That allowed it to perform the
special cryptanalytic test it embodied. The 5202 could demand that no
contradictions in two fields be found at the same time that ore or more
\"confirmations\" were located. To dc that, the 5202 contained sensing
and testing circuits that sought electrical balance among three
photocell circuits.107

£ES/y\$9 Although designed for the German teletypewriter problem, many
different applications were found for the 5202. It was used as a
statistical dudbuster, for example.


DMINTf/RCL TO UflA, AU5, HAW, bBH AND NZUIAI



\(U) Beyond the Comparators

fT0//GIj Well before the 5202 was delivered, the SIS was drawing up
plans for yet another new generation of 70mm film RAM. Their immediate
target was to be Japanese code systems, but the machines were intended
to be pathbreakers to a new era in microfilm devices.

(TS//S\'I) The first request was for a much enhanced Eastman version of
Steinhardt\'s Copperhead I. That would allow high-speed searches through
very long portions of text (hundreds of characters rather than only the
thirty in Tessie). Next came a request for a new type of 5202, one to
perform isomorphic tests. Most important, according to the \"F\" group,
was a film Slide Run machine with very advanced electronics. It was to
be 100 times more powerful than the relay-based IBM versions.

(T8//SI) The requests explained that each machine was urgently needed
for attacks on Japanese weather and army codes. But the \"F\" group, to
be credible, had to acknowledge that it might take some time to develop
the new RAMs perhaps too long given the signs that the Pacific war was
winding down. To avoid losing their machines, they provided a thorough
analysis of the role of film computation in SIS\'s future, hoping that
even if the request for specific machines was rejected, research funding
would continue.108

(S//SI) Emphasizing that it was crucial to keep the RAM group at Eastman
together, \"F\" asked for enough money to sustain, at the least, a
research effort in Rochester for several years. They admitted that the
machines they needed were more of a challenge than the 5202, but they
said the future ofSIGINT demanded new RAMs.\'09

\(U) The Machine That Wasn\'t

(C//0I) There was one challenge that \"F\" group did not attempt to
meet, a possible RAM

that was not even mentioned during the war - a machine for traffic
analysis. Neither the army nor the navy tried to create a machine for
\"data processing.\" The absence of massive fast memories and rapid
input -output equipment meant that little attention was paid to creating
a revolutionary data processing engine. A \"data\" machine had to wait
until agency priorities changed and until computer readers, printers,
and memories with capabilities far beyond those of the early 1940s
emerged.

\(U) Notes

1\. (.TV/S-tj A glimpse into the complexity of the weighting methods is
found in(¥S)-NSA CCH XII Z, Lt. A. H. Clifford to Lt. J. H. Howard,
\"Full Selector: operation 01: a four digit code group differences,\" 22
February 1945. When a similar method was used against the Japanese
weather systems, the required calculations to arrive at the weights for
the \"statistical\" attack proved so numerous that the cryptanalysts
asked that an electronic multiplying machine be constructed, (\"mffm)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley, \"Preparation of Weighting Film,
SecondaryStage Problem,\" OP-20-G, 2 August 1945.

2\. (T0//DI) The use of log weights to estimate whether or not plain
language was appearing as the result of a decryption process was well
established by mid-war. The Gee-Whizzer had been built around the idea.
(S//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1989. The very innovative Bulldozer
(discussed below) was aBombe version of the method. £CS} NSA CCH Series
XII Z, CNO, CITS Paper TS-30, \"Bulldozer Supplementary Manual,\" Navy
Dept., Washington, November 1945.

3\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series VII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"Possible
Engineering Solutions for Full Selector Problem,\" OP-20-G-4-A5, 23
November 1944. The \"M\" engineering group had kept in touch with all
Allies\' computer and electronic development projects of World War II.
The failure to mention electrostatic memory\' in the JN25 problem
reports was perhaps not a result of ignorance but of a knowledge of both
the primitive stage of development of the tech




TOP aECRET/ICOMINTORCL TOUQA, AU3, OAN, ODR AMD KZU/X1

nology and the unlikelihood that potentially fast electrostatic memories
would hold large amounts of information. Useful for insights into memory
technology of the era is James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary of Data
Processing Technology (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987).

4Tt3//64» NSA CCH XTT Z, OP-20-G-4-A, \"Electronic Matrices,\" 19
September \^44.

5.fS) Such a \"memory\* was not uncommon at the time.

6\. (TSft\*\*} NSA CCH Series XII Z Samuel S, Snyder, \"Famous First
Facts, NSA: ?a:\'t 1, Precompiler Machine Cryptanalysis.\"

7\. (S//SI) NSA CCH XII Z, OP-20-G-4-A, \"Electronic Matrices,\" 19
September 1944.

8\. (U) The highly significant Duenna project is discussed below.

9\. (U) On the tube reliability question and the success of their use in
the machine that :s generally held to be the \"first\'\' electronic
computer (although it had a special-purpose architecture), see Njncy
Stern, From ENLAC toUNIVAC: An Appraise! of the EckertMauchly Computers
(Bedford, Mass: Digital Press, 1981). The ENIAC had some 18,000 tubes
and a veryhigh downtime because of that.

10\. (Si. Ideas for use of photocells and glass plates were suggested in
some of the NDRC fire-control proposals. Those seemed impractical to
Steinhardt.

11\. («//«J NSA CCH XII Z,OP-2C-G-4-A, \"Electronic Matrices,\" 19
September 194-4,

12\. (U) Louis A Gebhard, Evohitir-n nfthe Naval Radio-Electronics and
Contritmthns of the Naval Research Laboratory, (Washington, D.C.: Naval
Research Laboratory, 1979), 326-8, also displays a veiy advanced German
acetate tape system that was capture;! during the war.

13\. CSym NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Stein hard t, \"Additive Machines:
F:\"\<criral Summary of,\" 27 November 1944.TSO Lt. A. H. CliTord to Lt.
H. H. Howard, \"Full Selector: operation on 4-digit code group
differences,\" 22 February 19\*3- ¥■)• NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Conferences at Da}ton,\" n -\'.pril 1945.

14\. (U) OP-20-G and the engineers at SIS were not the only Americans
searching for appio;;riate \"computing technologies\" to meet escalating
demands. See for example, Chapters two and three, in Kent C.

Redmond and Thomas M. Smith, Project Whirlwind: The History of a Pioneer
Computer (Bedford, Massachusetts: Digital Press, 1980).

15\. tS77\*\^ NSA CCH XII Z, Conferences at Dayton,\" 11 April 1945.
Interviews with Phil Bochicchio, June 1994. (U) W.W. Stifler, Jr. (ed.)
High Speed Computing Devices: By the Staff of Engineering Research
Associates, Inc. (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc., 1950), 346.

16\. (6\#SD NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Conferences at Dayton,\" 11 April
1945. Lt. Reid was also important to the project. The same type of
selector problem drove OP-20-G back to film machines. But the
EastmanKodak \"Amber,\" described below, was created for the Japanese
weather systems.

17\. \#} NCML had received a German magnetic disk sometime late in the
war, but magnetic disks were already known to Americans. Like the
computer itself, magnetic disk technology was \"in the air.\"

18\. 0S\#«) NSA CCH Series XII Z CNO CITP TS32, \"Mercury,\" Washington,
D.C.: Navy Department, December, 1945. (R) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Mercury,\" May 1953.

19\. (TS77\*}) NSA CCH Series XII Z CNO CITP TS32, \'•Mercury,\" Navy
Department, Washington, D.C., December, 1945. \"fRi. NSA CCH Series XII
Z, \"MercUiy,\" May 1953.

20\. 3S//8+) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, \"Brief Descriptions of RAM
Equipment,\" Washington, D.C.: Navy Department, October 1947,14.

21 CESj\^Sl) Mercury also had an electronic circuit that cc-\'jld set
and record the \"slides\" the collator performed,

Z2.(rBfim NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, \"Brief Descriptions of RAM
Equipment,\" Navy Department, Washington, D.C.: Navy Department, October
1947, 14.

23\. OPSjV\*;) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. Mercury was retired ir March 1949.

24\. £¥&\#«-) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Report of 3 January 1944 by Lt. L.
Steinhardt: JN157 Rattler.\"

25\. gmffSf) NSA CCH Series XII Z \"Report of 3 January 1944 by Lt. L.
Steinhardt: JN157 Rattler.\"





26\. -ffly/Oir NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Memorandum of 3 January 1944 From
Lt. L. Steinhardt, Another Idea for Rattler,\" 5 January 1944.

27\. (T3//3I) OP-20-G-43, \"FINAL REPORT, Project M-242, Rattler.\"

28\. (S\#SQ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Inventories of RAM Equipment, 1945.
(T0//DI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval Communications, CITP
TS-6 \"Rattler,\" Washington, D.C., circa 1945NSA NCML-CSAW Message
File, October 22, 1943, Steinhardt to G, \"Viper Design\"; November 24,
1943, Ely to Desch, \"Design of plugboard to automate Viper stecker
analysis\" and August 14, 1943, \"Python to be shipped to Washington.\"

29\. {S//SQ NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"General Purpose
Machine (SERPENT),\" OP-20-GE, 29 September 1944.

30\. (U) It is important to note that Steinhardt did not mention the
Robinsons, which were multitape machines. Perhaps that was because he
had not been told of them.

31\. CS\#«) NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"General Purpose
Machine (SERPENT),\" OP-20-GE 29 September 1944.

32\. (S//S\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"General Purpose
Machine (SERPENT),\" OP-20-GE, 29 September 1944, 4. \"Rattan problems
will demand a truly versatile machine in the early analytic stages. One
such problem (involving something like the proposed \"Imagination
Machine\") is now current; this could be handled very nicely on
Serpent.\" By the end of the war, a traditional type of analog machine
was built for one of the Russian devices. The Americans called their
machine \"Ricky.\"

33- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G \"War Diary Reports: March
1,1943-May 31, 1948,\" August 1945.

34\. (U) David J. Crawford, The Autoscritcher and the Superscritcher,
forthcoming, The Annals of the History of Computing , NARA RG457,
SRH-361. \"History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The
General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 269-270. NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval
Communications, CITPTS-39, \"Duenna Operations Manual,\" March 1946, and
TS-20 \"Bulldozer Operating Manual.\"

35- fFS7/SI) NSA CCH Local Archive, \"Army-Navy Descriptive Dictionary
ofCryptologic Terms,\" Army Security Agency, February 1947, 131, defines
scratching as the testing of assumptions by examining its implications
for 0 jntradictions, eliminating those with contradictions, tht .1
\"scoring\" the remainder.

36\. CFS/r&\* NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of
General Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\' 26 March, 1945.
f\[4304\] 9.

37\. (3S\#&!-) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of
General Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March, 1945.
f\[4607\] f\[4i42\] 129 f\[4i49\]

38\. ePfr//Sl) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944 \[sic\], 129. (3=8)NSA AHA ACC
17480, CNO CITS TS-17, \"The N-800 Bombe,\" Washington, circa 1946. (¥8)
(S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of General
Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March 1945.

39- 0S\#«r) NSA AHA ACC 35173, (CNO, CITS TS-49, \"A Posteriori Remarks
on the Cryptanalytic Aspects of the Bulldozer,\" Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP20 to King, Duenna.
CES//8ft NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger to OP-20, to March 1945,
\"Statistical BombeInstallation of.\'

40\. (TS//S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"Memorandum, Statistical
Bombe-Successful Installation of,\" 10 March 1945. A statistical grenade
was the first goal. (3S) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-49, \'A
Posteriori Remark on the Cryptanalytic Aspects of the Bulldozer,\" Navy
Dept., Washington, September 1946.

41\. (TS//S3- NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"Memorandum, Statistical
Bombe-Successful installation of,\" 10 March 1945.

42\. (T0//SI) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS, TS-49, \"A Posteriori Remarks
on the Cryptanalytic Aspects ofthe Bulldozer,\" Washington: Navy Dept.,
September 1946, 3.

43- (TS77ST) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS49, \"A Posteriori Remarks
on the Cryptanalytic Aspects ofthe Bulldozer,\" Washington: Navy Dept,





September 1946, pages 3 and 8 give the \"weights\" assigned to each
letter based upon analysis of Enigma traffic.

44- (T5//3r) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS49, \"A Posteriori Remarks
on the Cryptanalytic Aspects of the Bulldozer,\" Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946, points out that the practical limit in the machine was a
forty-five-letter . ipher because of the probabilities of Enigma wheel
turnovers.

45- (T3//3r) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, CITS Paper TS-30, \"Bulldozer
Supplemental Manual,\" Washington: Navy Dept., November 1945. Because
cipher-only attacks could produce so many false hits, using Bulldozer on
tests for wheel order and stecker led to extraordinarily time-consuming
print checking. The unknown stecker was the truly difficult problem.
(TS) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-49, \"A Posteriori Remarks on the
Cryptanah \"k Aspects of the Bulldozer,\" Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946.

46\. (¥S//S\*)\" NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM
Panel Reports. 1945-1949.\" The Americans had not yet told the British
about the Bulldozer in 1947. On the fears about the security of the ECM,
(8)-NSA CCH Series XII Z,OP-20-G to Admiral King, \"This may develop.\"

47- ETS//SI) NSA CCH Series XTI Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953, indicates that the pluggable refertor
was primarily a Yellow system machine. (TS//\*l) NSA (CCH Series XII Z,
IT. H.Campaigne and J 7. Pendergrass, \"Second Report on Cryptanalytic
Use ofHigh Speed Digital Computing Machines,\" OP-m-L, J) December 1046,
Appendix 1. shows that both the dermaii Army and Air Force were
beginning to use the nev reflector. The OP-20-G cryptanalysts built
Duenna on the assumption that each problem would take 5 x 10 to the
sixth power tests. fS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20GMF, \"Report:
Proposed Design for Drenna. Mark One,\" 25 February 1944.

48\. P&ffSTfNSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Uncle Walter,\" circa 1945

49\. {Sy&l} NSA CCH Series XTT 7., FAM list and Conference at Dayton, 11
April 1945

\$o.J2&Um NSA CCH Series XI\' Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machine? in NSA,\" 30 May 1953, \"Duenna.\" (S} NSA CCH Series XII Z,
OP-20

GMF, Report: Proposed Design for Duenna Mark One,\" 25 February 1944,
11.

51\. (T6//SI) The most complete descriptions of Duenna and its allied
cryptanalytic process are found in (¥8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO CITS
Paper TS-39 \"Duenna Operations Manual,\" Washington, D.C.: Navy Dept.,
March 1946; C\#fNSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, CITS Paper TS-39 \"Duenna,
Theory Manual,\" Washington, D.C.: Navy Dept., July 1946; f&) NSA CCH
Series XII Z,0P-20-GMF, \"Report: Proposed Design for Duenna Mark One,\"
25 February 1944; NSA AHA ACC 25057, CNO CITS TS-39 \"Duenna Electrical
Circuits,\" July 1946.

52\. (T-StTW) NSA CCH \"P\" Collection Box CCO 67, RIP 608, CITS Paper
TS-10/E-6, Enigma Series Vol. 6, Duenna,\" CNC-OP-20, January\* 1946,
contains the technical description of \"G\'s\" version of the scratching
attack.

53- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem, 268, implies that
three different methods were developed by OP-20-G and SIS for the
reflector problem and that the SIS attack and machines were
significantly different from \"G\'s.\" It also states that GC&CS\'s
Giant machine embodied the SIS attack.

54- G8T NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-GMF, \"Report: Proposed Design for
Duenna Mark One,\" 25 February 1944, 12.

55\. (JS\#ei) NSA CCH \"P\" Collection Box CCO 67, RIP 608, CITS Paper
TS-10/E-6, \"Enigma Series Vol. 6, Duem-ia,\" CNC-OP-20, January 1946,
6-3. Note that quite a different run time needed for Duenna to solve a
problem is given in (XS//S1) NSA CCH Series IV B1-2, \"History ofthe
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\"
269. It states that it took Duenna two weeks to test \"all
constantatiors\" in a problem. The vast difference in time estimates is
due to different definitions of \"problem\" and attack.

E6. PPS\#S.I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H.H. Campaigns and J.T.
Pende\'-grass, \"Second Report on High Spe=d Digital Computing
Machines,\" OP-20-L, 18 December 1946, Appendix I. (S\#») NSA CCH Series
XTI Z, OP-20-GMF, \"Report: Proposed Design for Duenna Mark One,\" 25
February 1944, contains a





useful description of the Duenna menuing and of its printing system. The
search and test logic is explained in, NSA AHA ACC 25057, CNO CITS TS-39
\"Duenna Electrical Circuits,\" July 1946, 7-11.

57\. fJS\#Sf) NSA CCH Series XII Z,(Si20o8) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G, RIP 425, \"The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944 \[sic\] £¥5f NSA CCH Series XII Z,
CNO CITS Paper TS-39 \"\'Duenna Operations Manual,\" Washington, D.C.:
Navy Dept., March 1946, shows how the commutators\' sensing systems were
modified to fit the Duenna problem.

58\. (3//0I) NSA CCH XII Z, OP-20-G-4-A, \"Electronic Matrices,\" 1-9
September 1944. f\[4253\]

59\. &Sjf\$T) NSA AHA ACC 25057, CNO CITS TS39 \"Duenna Electrical
Circuits,\" July 1946, 13, 32, 44.

60\. (U) David J. Crawford and Philip E. Fox (ed.), The Autoscritcher and
the Superscritcher: Aids to Cryptanalysis of the German Enigma Cipher
Machine, 1944-1946,\" IEEE, Annals ofthe History of Computing, vol. 14,
No. 3,1992, 9-22. The Autoscritcher seems to have come into operation in
early 1945, some months after Duenna had been brought to life.

61\. SS//M) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,\" 269.

62\. CIS\^\#3 NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Nine, History of the Development Branch,\" 10 February
1953, 76.

63\. W/ST) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem, 269, gives the
date of first operation as Christmas 1944.

64\. (T0//0Q NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" September 1954.

65\. (TS//SB NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" September 1954. £ES} (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Tentative, Brief Description Of General Analytic Equipment for Enigma
Problems,\" 26 March 1945.

66\. (TS//SI) One bank was required for each cipher-plain pair being
tested. (3S)- NSA AHA ACC 11254, \"OP-20-G, \"Army Autoscritcher,\" 29
March 1945

67\. (U) Dc,\\id J. Crawford and Philip E. Fox (\<jg.), \"The
Autosci.tciiei and the Superscritcher: Ads to Cryptanalysis cf iht
German Enigma, Cipher Machine, 1944-1946,\'\' SEE, Annals ofthe History
of Computing, ,ol. 14, No. 3,1992, 12.

68.-f¥977\#) MSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Nine, History of the Development Branch,\" 10 February\'
1953, 78. Although the machine proved difficult to maintain, it was used
against \"E\" traffic and, then, attached to the 003 to function as a
crib dragger for Swiss Enigma problems. fFS)- (£.2568) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of General Analytic Equipment fiu
Enigma Problems,\" 26 March 1945, has an explanation o\'ihe use ofthe
\"cups.\"

69\. (U) David J. Crawford and Philip E. Fox (ed.), \"The Autoscritcher
and the Superscritcher: Aids to Cryptanalysis of the German Enigma
Cipher Machine, 1944-1946,\" IEEE, Annals ofthe History of Computing,
vol. 14, No. 3,1992, 15. (S\#8f) NSA AHA 16899N, Army Service Forces, C.
R. Deeter, \"General Specifications and Technical Description:
Superscritcher,\" 13 January 1945.

70\. GBJ\^/6iO NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA \"History of the Signal Secur ty
Agency, Volume Nine, History of the Development Branch,\" 10 February
1953, 80.

71\. WW) NSA AHA 16899N, \"Super-Scritcher: System and Circuit Details,\"
points to the innovative ways the engineer\'s avoided many ofthe
pitfalls of purely digital circuits.

72\. (Sftm NSA AHA ACC 16899N, Harry B. Smith, \"Ring of Modified
Eccles-Jordan Trigger Circuits,\" 12 January 1945.

73- (U) Many ofthe electronic circuits were clever variants of digital
designs, especially those designed to circumvent the need for hundreds
of tubes to imitate or sense rotor signals. See £E8}- NSA AHA ACC
16899N, Army Service Forces, David J.Crawford, \"Frequency Sensmg in
Rotor Outputs: Super-scrrtcher,\" 17 January 1945- CCS//SH) NSA CCH
IX.B.1.9, SSA \"History ofthe Signal Security Agency, Volume Nine,
History ofthe Development Branch,\" 10 February 1953, 81.

74- eW/WTNSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd.





75\. (TS//SI) After the war OP-20- G did order an upgrade on 1CKY, and
Eastman reworked Amber and H\>po. £ES) NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder,
\"Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.\" But there was much
discontent with film and the maintenance problems of the devices.

76\. (U) Samuel Eliot Morison, History of United States Naval Operations
in World War U,v&ivne X1U, The Liberation of the Philippines, Luzon,
Mindanao, the Visayas, 1944-1945 (Boston: Little Brown and Company,
1975), 59.

77\. CES\#SO NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G \"Analysis of Analytical
Machine Attack on.IN-37,\" 24 March 1945.

78\. (TS\#»0 NSA, CCH Sena? XII Z, H.H. Campaigne, \".\'N-37, Prospectus
of Attack On,\" OP-20G, 27 January 1944.

79\. CI2\#») NSA CCH XTT Z; \"St.VJrfc;! Projects Needed: First Report
of,\" OP-20-G4A, 30 April 1945.

80\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XK Z,\"0P-20-G: Analysis of Analytical
Machine Attack on ./N-37,\" 24 March 1945. (TO//0I) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, OP-20G4A, \"JN-7 Strength of Additives :c\'\'oin a Two-Deep,\" 5
September 1945- (Wt\*3 NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Utilization of Available
Climatologjed Data for JN-37 PJ?Jn Text Estimates,\" OP-20-G-4A, 13Jane
1945. &&ri\$r) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"JN-37: Major Computation Needed
for Machiic \^V\'ght\'\"..\" OP-20G4-A, 3 May 1945.

81\. (£\^ NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. A. Skinner, \"Proposal for Decoding
Device,\" OP-20-G, 16 February 1943. £\[4022\].

82\. (S/jWJ NSA CCH Series XH Z, L. R. Sfcrnhardt \"Additive Machines:
Historical Summary of,\" 2\--November 1944. (W\#Sf) OP-2U-C.-4-A5, 23
Ncverrber 19.44, L. R. StekhvcL \"Possible Engiutfdng Solut\'ons for
Full Selector Problems.\" OS\^ST) NSA AHA ACC 26373, \"-d ? Rovlett,
\"Report Eythe Subcommittee On \"lie Application of Rapid AnaHtical
Machinery t?the Solution of Enci\'Dbered Code,\" 3 November 1944 (0//SI)
Stehihardt, L.R., \"Copperhead it(P:\"GJect M-230) Final Report,\" 9
November 1944. tSVS\*1 NSA AHA 15\^5. John N. Seaman, \"Memcnwdum for
Major Edgerton, Li?;;,on with Navy \#3, Us? \<-.f Pr-jp on Jap Na\>al
Problems ofB II Type,\" 9 Juno :.Q44

83\. (S/\^S9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard, \"Summary of Conference
on the \'37\* Machine With Eastman-Kodak and NCR Co.,\" OP-20-G, 9 June
1945

84\. (-¥6/ /9t) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"0P-20-G: Analysis of Analytical
Machine Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March 1945, part I Introduction, 8.

85\. CES\^ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"0P-20-G: Anahsis of Ar.a\'ytical
Machine Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March 1945.

86\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"OP-20-G: Anarysis of Analytical
Machine Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March 1945, part I Introduction, 10.

87\. (&\#m NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard, \"Summary of Conference on
the \'137\" Machine With Eastman Kodak and NCR Co.,\" OP-20-G, 9 June
1945.

88\. fFSfT\^f) NSA CCH Series XII Z, D. L. Noble, \"Machine Weight Study
for Proposed JN-37 Machine Part V OP-20-G-4-D, -\'tjJiily 1945, and NSA
CCH Series XII Z, D. I- Noble, \"Machine Weight Study for Proposed JN-37
Machine Part II,\" OP-20-G, 2 August 1945, give insights into how
difficult it was to set and maintain the photoelectric system so that
false hits would be avoided and tn.e hits tagged.

8c. \@8tfG& NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Whsatley, Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953

90\. \[T&tfSfJ NSA CCH Series XIIZ, J. H. Howard, MN-£7 Macbi\'i?: Report
of Conference at Eastman Kodak Co. on 25 May 1945,\" OP-20-G, 26 May
1945.

91\. (JS\#8fl NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley, \"Preparation of
Weighting Film, Secondary Stage Problem,\" OP-20-G, 2 August 1945.

9:1, (TSyySQ-NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley, \"Preparrtion
cfWeighting Film, Secondary Stage Problem,\" 0P-2O-G, 2 August 1945.

03\. PPS7W NSA CCH XII Z, \"Statistical Project Needed: \^irst Report
of,\" OP-20-G-4A, 30 April 1945.

9 J. Q&tf/rr) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"OP-20-G: AiieHsu of Analytical
Machine Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March to-\>5.

95- C&fffi) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953, NSA. CCH Series XII Z,List of Machines
and Target?, circa 1945. Actual run-times were not given for \"27\" jobs
on Amber so an estimate had to be made based upon s general idea of the
speed of the machine





and the degree of parallel processing built into it. The
twenty-four-hour estimate was based on 800 comparisons per second and
100,000,000 tests. This estimate of hours coincides with an official
estimate fcr a round-robin of 1,000 500-letter messages for a general
coincidence test.

96\. (TS//3T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, list of
Computers,\" nd.

97\. ffO//3Q NSA CCH Series XII Z.file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949-\*

98\. tT0//3r) NSA CCH Series XI K, MN-37 Machine Memoranda,\" and \"Some
Uses of Amber in Hagelin Attack,\" December 1949.

99\. &&\^f&ff OP-20-G did give Eastman a significant contract for new
models of ICKY and Hi\'PO after the war. However, it took many years for
the new models to be delivered.

iOO.XS\#8f) NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, \"Miiutes of RAM Meeting,\" 19
February 1945.

101\. W/ST) NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, \"Technical Paper, RAM,\" circa June
1945, 3,5. The SIS consulted with the navy about the new RAM ideas.
-(fr//9\#-NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film
I.C. Machine,\" 8 June 1945.

102\. (S\#9f) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B. Rowlett, \"Report By the
Subcommittee On the Application of Rapid Analytical Machinery to the
Solution of Enciphered Code,\" 3 November 1944.

103\. CS\^STJ Apparently, it was men such as Dale Marston who took the
lead as Leo Rosen seemed to favor electronic versions of the
special-purpose tabrelay machines that IBM was building for the Agency.
fjS//3fl NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert O.Femer, \"Rapid Analytic
Machinery Needed for Research,\" June 3,1943. On the RAM plans,
(S/\'/SIj NSA AHA ACC 26372, SSA, \"Rapid Analytical Machinery,\" circa
October 1943. W/6t) NSA AHA ACC 26373 Frank B. Rowlett, \"Two Copies of
Report on Rapid Analytical Machinery,\" 3 November 1944.

104\. (58\#M) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Status of RAM,\" circa June
1945- (S//S1) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Chief, \"F\" Branch, \"RAM Equipment,\"
29 March 1945.

105\. (W//W) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Status of RAM,\" circa June
1945, \*6\#S») NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, \"Technical Paper, RAM,\" circa
June 1945

(fl//0I) NSA CCH ACC 26373, \'Twenty-Fourth-RAM Report,\" 1 May 1945.

106.JCES//SQ NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"The Status of RAM,\" circa June
1945, 7.

107\. (S\#») NSA AHA ACC 29373, SIS Chief T Branch, \"Request for RAM
Equipment,\" 23 March 1945, 7

108\. (S//SI) NSA AHA ACC 29373, SIS Chief \"F\" Branch, \"Request for
RAM Equipment,\" 23 March 1945. 0£\#m NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B.
Rowlett, \"RAM in Future Cryptanalysis,\" 3 May 1945.

109\. (S//9f) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film
I.C. Machine,\" 8 June 1945, commented on the army\'s request.





75- ffS//SB After the war 0P-20-G did order an upgrade on 1CKY, and
Eastman reworked Amber and Hypo. (XS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder,
\"Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.\" But there was much
discontent with film and the maintenance problems of the devices,

76\. (U) Samuel Eliot Morison, History of United States Naval Operations
in World War H, v\^hine XIII, The Liberation ofthe Philippines, Luzon,
Mindanao, the Visayas, 1944-1945 (Boston: Little Brown and Company,
1975), 59,

77\. (W\#gQ NSA CCH Series XII Z,0P-20-G \"Analysis of Analytical Machine
Aita\^k on JN-37,\" 24 March 1945.

78\. (TS\#S\*) NSA, CCH Series XII Z, H.H. Campaigne, \".IN-37,
Prospectus of Attack On,\" OP-20G, 27 January 1944.

79- CIS\#S\*) NSA CCH XI1 2, \"Sta:i\<,fcl Projects Needed: First Report
of,\" OF-20-G4A, 30 April 1945,

80\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, fc0P-20-G: Analysis of Analytical
Machine Attack onJN-37,\" 24 March 1945- (T0//D1) NSA CCH Seri?s XII Z,
OP-20G-1-A, M\'N-7 Strength of Additives \*h\>m a Two-Deep,\" 5
SppJember 1945. (SSt¥\#) NSA CCH Serias XII Z, \"Utilization of
Available Climatologjoal Data for JN-37 Phin Text Estimates,\"
OP-20-G-4A, \'-3-Jjne 1945CtS\^/ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"JN-37: Major
Computation Needed for Maohiio V\"i\'ghti\';° OP-20G4-A, 3 May 1945.

81\. &U&) NSA CCH Series XII Z,J. A. Skinner, \"Proposal for Decoding
Device/\' OP-20-G, 16 February 1943. £\[4022\].

82\. (SA\<6\$ NSA CCH Series XTI Z, L. R. Stemharot \"Additive Machines:
Historical Summary of,\" 27 November 1944- CSjW) 0 \*-:\*;-Q-4-A5, 23
November 1944, L. R. Sterdnrct \"Possible Engiht\'e.dng Solutions for
Full Selector Problems.\" G67YST) NSA AHA ACC 263/3, ?■\"\<\'•.\'• ?
Rowlett, \"Report By the Subcommittee On\'lie Application of Rapid
AnaHrical Machinery to the Solution of Enciphered Code,\" 3 November
1944 (0//SI) Stein hardt, LR., \"Copperhead 11 (Project M-230) Final
Report,\" 9 November 1944. tS\'/S\*) NSA AHA 15?5, John N. Seaman,
\"Memorandum for Major Edgerio/y Li?;;,on with Navy \#3, ITs? of P.r-.rr
on Jap Naval Problems of B II Type,\" 9 June -.944.

83\. &W NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,

\"Summary- of Conference on the \'37\' Machine With Eastman-Kodak and
NCR Co.,\" OP-20-G, 9 June 1945.

84\. mm NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"OP-20-G: Analysis of Analytical Machine
Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March 1945, part I Introduction, 8.

85\. CES\#3T) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"0P-20-G: Anah sis of Ana\'ytical
Machine Attack on JN-37;\' 24 March 1945.

86\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"OP-20-G: Analysis of Analytical
Machine Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March 1945, part I Introduction, 10,

87\. (\$tm NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H.Howard, \"Summary of Conference on
the \'137 Machine With Eastman Kodak and NCR Co.,\" OP-20-G, 9 June
1945.

88\. «FS\#S-P5 NSA CCH Series XII Z, D. L. Noble, \"Machine Weight Study
fox Proposed JN-37 Machine Part V OP-20-G-4-D. \"9 July 1945, and NSA
CCH Series XTI Z, D. L Noble, \"Machine Weight Study for Proposed JN-37
Machine Part II,\" OP-20-G, 2 August 1945-, giro insights into how
difficult it was to set and maintain the photoelectric system so that
false hits would b? avoided and trie hits tagged.

go. eWffl\* NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, Ciyptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May

1953

90\. (\*KSjW NSA CCH Series XIIZ, J. H. Howard, MN-£7 Machine: Report of
Conference at Eastman Kodak Co. on 25 May 1945,\" OP-20G, 26 May 1945.

91\. CXS\#Stf NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley, \"Preparation of
Weighting Film, Secondary Stage Problem,\" OP-20-G, 2 August 1945

9:1 (3\$\#S\*)-NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley, \"Preparri\'on
cfWeighting Film, Secondary- Stage Problem,\" 0D-2o-G, 2 August 1945.

93\. ffiS//«f; NSA CCH XII Z, \"Statistical Project Needed: First Report
of,\" OP-20-G-4A, 30 April 1945.

9t. (FvfffT) XSA CCF Series XII Z,\"0P-20-G: Ato.Hsl, of Analytical
Machine Attack on JN-37,\" 24 March :o.-;5.

95\. CEBtfSt) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wherttey, \"Ciyptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953, N\"?A CCH Series XII Z,List of Machines
and Targ-ls, :irca 1945. Actual run-times were not given for \"37\" jobs
on Amber so an estimate had to be made based upon ageaeral idea ofthe
speed ofthe machine





and the degree of parallel processing built into it. The
twenty-four-hour estimate was based on 800 comparisons per second and
100,000,000 tests. This estimate of hours coincides with an official
estimate fcr a round-robin of 1,000 500-letter messages for a general
coincidence test.

96\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd.

97\. ff3//39 NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949.\"

98\. (-¥0//Sr) NSA CCH Series XIK, MN-37 Machine Memoranda,\" and \"Some
Uses of Amber in Hagelin Attack,\" December 1949.

99\. ffS\^§r)-OP-20-G did give Eastman a significant contract for new
models of 1CKY and HYPO after the war. However, it took many years for
the new models to be delivered.

ioo.XS\#Sf) NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, \"Mnutes of RAM Meeting,\" 19
February 1945.

101\. \<S\#ST) NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, \"Technical Paper, RAM,\" circa
June 1945, 3,5. The SIS consulted with the navy about the new RAM ideas.
4&-/i\$\$-NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film
I.C. Machine,\" 8 June 1945.

102\. CSyye\*) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B. Rowlett, \"Report By the
Subcommittee On the Application of Rapid Analytical Machinery to the
Solution of Enciphered Code,\" 3 November 1944.

103\. CS\>¥WJ Apparently, it was men such as Dale Marston who took the
lead as Leo Rosen seemed to favor electronic versions of the
special-purpose tabrelay machines that IBM was building for the Agency.
rS\#»3 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert 0. Ferner, \"Rapid Analytic
Machinery Needed for Research,\" June 3,1943- On the RAM plans, (S//SI)
NSA AHA ACC 26372, SSA, \"Rapid Analytical Machinery,\" circa October
1943. W/S\*\* NSA AHA ACC 26373 Frank B. Rowlett, Two Copies of Report
on Rapid Analytical Machinery,\" 3 November 1944.

104\. CB8\#9I) NSA CCH Series XII Z,The Status of RAM,\" circa June 1945.
£S//SJ»- NSA AHA ACC 26373, Chief, \"F\" Branch, \"RAM Equipment,\" 29
March 1945.

105\. C\*9\#6J) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Status of RAM,\" circa June
1945, £S\#S1) NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, \"Technical Paper, RAM,\" circa
June 1945.

(3//0I) NSA CCH ACC 26373, Twenty-Fourth-RAM Report,\" i May 1945.

loe.iXSr\'rSf) NSA CCH Series XII Z,The Status of RAM,\" circa June
1945, 7.

107\. (S\#») NSA AHA ACC 29373, SIS Chief \"F\" Branch, \"Request for RAM
Equipment,\" 23 March 1945, 7

108\. (S//SI) NSA AHA ACC 29373, SIS Chief \"F\" Branch, \"Request for
RAM Equipment,\" 23 March 1945. (XS//SQ NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B.
Rowlett, \"RAM in Future Cryptanalysis,\" 3 May 1945,

109\. \@ffm NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film
I.C. Machine,\" 8 June 1945, commented on the army\'s request.







TOrSECK:ET/\>C.CTTWTMa:f TCTUSA, AUSTC-AMTuuTCAiiLKZG/XT

