It Wasn.t All Magic: The Early Struggle to Automate Cryptanalysis, 1930s-1960s {#it-wasn.t-all-magic-the-early-struggle-to-automate-cryptanalysis-1930s-1960s .center dir="ltr"}
==============================================================================

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically.
This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat
susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading
sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect
guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may
remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might
have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from
the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your
ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is
not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the
corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before
the print book\'s visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working
to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the
meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library
and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive\'s
purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians,
scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical
collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes
texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages,
and provides specialized services for information access for the blind
and other persons with disabilities.




NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY

CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE

FORT GEORGE G. MEADE, MARYLAND 20755-6000

Serial: MDR-68543 29 May 2013

In response to your 4 August 2012 declassification request, we have
reviewed the NSA cryptologic history entitled: It Wasn \'t All Magic:
The Early Struggle to Automate Cryptanalysis, 1930s-1960s. The report
has been reviewed under the Mandatory Declassification Review (MDR)
requirements of Executive Order (E.O.) 13526 and is enclosed. Some
portions deleted from the document were found to be currently and
properly classified in accordance with E.O. 13526. The information
denied meets the criteria for classification as set forth in Section 1. 4
subparagraphs (c) and (d) and remains classified TOP SECRET and SECRET
per Section 1.2 of E.O. 13526. The withheld information is exempt from
automatic declassification in accordance with Section 3.3(b) (2) and (3)
and (h) (6) of the Executive Order. Section 3.5 (c) of E.O. 13526,
allows for the protection afforded to information under the provisions
of law. Therefore, information that would reveal NSA/CSS functions and
activities has been protected in accordance with Section 6, Public Law
86-36 (50 U.S. Code 402 note).

Since your request for declassification has been denied in part, you may
file an appeal to the NSA/CSS MDR Appeal Authority. The appeal must be
postmarked no later than 60 calendar days after the date of the denial
letter. The appeal shall be in writing addressed to the NSA/CSS MDR
Appeal Authority (DJ5), National Security Agency, 9800 Savage Road, STE
6881, Ft George G. Meade, MD 20755-6881. The appeal shall reference the
initial denial of access and shall contain, in sufficient detail and
particularity, the grounds upon which the requester believes the release
of information is required. The NSA/CSS MDR Appeal Authority will
endeavor to respond to the appeal within 60 working days after receipt
of the appeal.

Sincerely,

BLAKE C. BARNES

Chief

Declassification Services

Encl: a/s




Cover Photos: (U) (clockwise from upper left): Hypo, Vannevar Bush,
Harvest, Joseph Desch, Gee Whizzer, Stanford Hooper, Bombe, Samuel
Snyder



I UNITED STATES CKYPTOLOGIC HISTORY \|

a a

a a

I Special/SerCe\* 1

i Voiu4fte\^6 ja

a a

a a

a @

a a

a e

a a

\|i 7\^\^ Early Struggle/ to- A ut&ryi&te/ \\

a ra

I Cryptanalytiti 1930y - 1960y \\

a i

a a

a a

a a

a a

\[a Colin B. Burke &

a @

i i

a a

a a

a a

a a

a a

a a

a a

a a

a a

i CENTER FOR CRYPTOLOGIC HISTORY i

a a

I NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY \|

a a

I 2002 I

a a

a a

a\. a

TnP cprpPT/frOMIMTffPFI T? WA, iMfT. ni\'iH, nnn \'\"\" \'■■■ \"\"!



Page ii



CONTENTS

Page

\(U) Foreword xi

\(U) Introduction

\(U) Before NSA Opened Its Hies 1

\(V) The Stocks Were Not All They i

\(V) Ask What the Agency Did for 2

\(U) Ask Not Whaf the Agency Can Do For 3

\(U) Inspiration and Patience 4

\(V) There Wasn\'t Enough Magic 5

\(I) A Story with Only a Few Acronyms 5

\(U) Two Decades before the Computer 6

Chapter 1 (U) An Academic in Need of the Navy \... Until

•j

\(V) An Institution for the Real World

\(U) A Man for All Technologies 8

\(U) More Than an Ingenious Yankee 9

\(U) The Politics of Mathematics and Engineering 9

\(U) The Manager of Science 10

\(V) Bush and Stratton\'s Dream 10

\(V) Bush Confronts Little Science 10

\(L) Bush\'s Great Plan 11

\(U) Beyond Analog Mechanical Machines it

\(U) Two Men with a Need 12

\(U) A Man for the Navy 13

(I\') Another Plan for Science and the Navy 14

\(U) Hooper Confronts the Bureaucracy 15

\(U) A Few Men and Women for Secrecy 16

:(U) The Search for Pure Cryptanalysis 1(1

\(U) From Electronics to Electromechanics 18

\(V) A Young Man for the Future 20

\(U) The Dream Postponed Again 20

\(l) The Dream Reborn, for a Moment 21

\(U) Little Science Meets the Little Navy, Again 21

\(U) A Man for Statistics 22

\(U) Science and the Navy Need Other Friends 23

\(U) The Private World of Science 24

\(U) A Man for Applied Mathematics and Information 24

\(U) American Science and the War - the NDRC 24




\(U) Corporate Charity 25

\(U) The Navy Comes in Second 26

Chapter 2 (U) The First Electronic Computer: Perhaps

\(U) A Reminder of Hooper\'s Hopes and Frustrations 33

\(U) The Institutional Context 33

\(U) The First Defeat: Bush Is Rejected 34

\(U) A Machine Too Soon 34

\(U) The Decision to Build a Machine 35

\(U) Bush and Wenger Select a Problem 35

\(U) The Index 36

\(U) An Added Bonus, Possibly 37

\(U) Bush Outlines the Machine and Sets Different Goals 37

\(U) The Comparator Really Doesn\'t Go to Washington 38

\(U) Too Much to Ask of Mere Machines 39

\(U) No Thanks for the Memories 40

\(U) The Limits of Mechanics 40

\(U) Let There Be Light, But Not Too Much 41

\(U) The Most Difficult Problem of All, But It Wasn\'t 41

\(U) The Easiest Becomes the Most Difficult 42

\(U) Beyond Murphy\'s Law 42

\(U) Spring Is a Time for Love, Not Machinery 44

\(U) RAM Project Seems to Die, Late 1938 44

\(U) A Comparator There May Never Be . 45

\(U) Big Science Begins to Emerge 45

\(U) Fire Control 46

\(U) The Second Comparator 46

\(U) OP-20-G and Ultra 47

\(U) So Long for So Little 48

\(U) The Search for the Second Comparator 48

\(U) No Equal Partners in Ultra 49

\(U) Another Machine That Wouldn\'t 49

\(U) The Revenge of Mechanics: the First Rounds 50

(TS//SI//REL) Logs and Relays - the Gee Whizer 50

\(U) The Navy Get Some Changes 51

\(U) The Greatest Kludge of All, But It Worked 52

\(U) Trying to Save Bush\'s Reputation 52

\(U) Yet Another Chance 52

\(U) When the Ciphers Can\'t Be Broken 53

\(U) Wenger to the Rescue 54

\(U) Mathematics to Meet the Great Challenge 54

\(U) Bureaucracy vs. Science, Again 54

\(U) A Seeming Victory for Science 55




Chapter 3 (U) Bush\'s Dream Does Not Come True

\(U) A Look Ahead lo Peace 63

\(U) January 1942: Too Much Too Late 63

\(U) A Giant Step Backwards 64

\(U) Haste and Confustion 64

\(U) Tessie Wouldn\'t FAther 65

\(U) Jessie\'s New Hat 66

\(U) You Can Use Some of the Technology

Some of the Time, But 67

\(U) A Machine for Mrs. Driscoll\'s Special Problem 69

\(U) A Paper War, Perhaps 71

\(U) The Comparator Dies, Again 71

\(U) Almost Another Digital Machine 72

\(U) The Old Technologies Are the Best Technologies,

for a Time 74

\(U) Meanwhile, the Tabulator\'s Revenge 74

\(U) LBM\'s Most Special Contribution 75

\(U) In the Absence of Rapid Machines 77

Chapter 4 (U) Meeting the Crisis: Ultra and the Bombe

\(U) Looking Ahead - Ultra Saves RAM and OP-20-G

Creates a Science Company 83

\(U) The \"E\" Machine 83

\(U) Only a Few Were Able and Willing to Tackle \"E\" 84

\(U) The Poles Automate Cryptanalysis

in Their Special Way 85

\(U) Keeping the Bombe Secret for Too Long 85

\(U) A Fresh Start against \"E\" 86

\(U) Analog and Parallel May Be Fast, But 88

\(U) Ask and Then Not Receive 89

\(U) Gave All and Get 90

\(U) What Happened After 91

\(U) Trust Builds Very Slowly 91

\(U) Agreements and Agreements and Agreements, But 91

\(U) Going Separate Ways 92

(IT) America without an Ultra 93

\(U) An American Ultra, Perhaps 93

\(U) Faster Than a Speeding Relay 94

\(U) Great British Expectations 94

\(U) Great American Expectations 94

\(U) Trying to Step Forward, Not Back 97

\(U) Britain\'s Own Version of Bush\'s Electronic Dreams 97




\(U) No Time for Electronic 98

(U)A Crisis of Organizationa and Technology 99

\(U) Searching for a Place in Ultra 99

\(U) The Power of Innocence 99

\(U) The Power of Ignorance 101

\(U) The Cousins Will Have Their Way\...to a Degree 103

\(U) A Long Apprenticeship 104

\(U) Desch Takes Charge 105

\(U) Wenger Gets His Organization 105

\(U) Of Tires and Transmissions and

a Disappearing Laboratory 105

\(U) Saving the American Bomhe 108

\(U) A Bombe Too Late 108

\(U) A Program Based on Another Technological Bet 109

\(U) July 26th: a Day of Defeat 109

\(U) A Victory a Bit Too Late 109

\(U) Ignorant No More 111

\(U) The Bombes at Work 111

\(U) More to It Than the Bombe 112

Chapter 5(U) A Search for Other \"Bombes

»

\(U) Meanwhile, the Army 127

\(U) The Search for Another American Ultra 128

\(U) A Great Electronic Adventure, the Freak 129

\(U) Tabulators and Traffic: A Data Processing War 130

\(U) Making the Tools More Powerful 132

\(U) Slides, Runs, and Endless Decks of Cards 132

\(U) The Other Bombe Program 135

\(U) Another Step Back J. 35

\(U) More to It Than the Machine 137

\(U) A Machine Looking for Work 139

\(U) More Emergencies and More Compromises 140

\(U) The Other Purples 142

\(U) New Guys and Old Guys, New Techniques

and Old Insights 142

\(U) A Matter of Machines and Control 143

\(II) The Snake That Died Too Young, Viper 144

\(U) A Snake in Hand, Perhaps --- I\*ython 146

\(U) Of Strips and Strippers 148

\(U) Strips Without Strippers 149

\(U) The Attack on the Many JN25S 150

\(U) The Comparators That Weren\'t the Copperhead

Proposals and the Victory of Electronics 153




\(I) Beyond the Copperheads - the JN25 Crisis

and \"M\'s\" Response 155

Chapter 6 (U) Beyond the Bombes and Beyond World War II

\(I) After the Bombe 163

\(U) Every Which Way: The Code Challenge Continues 164

\(U) The Navy\'s Madame X--- the Strongest Selecton 165

\(U) A Wall of Knobs 166

\(V) Walls of Tubes 167

\(U) Into the Beyond and the Past, Rooms of Wires

and Disk 168

\(U) Desparate Options and a Conservative Selector 168

\(U) Walls of Pipes and Thousands of Dots 169

\(V) The Relay Selector Gets an Electronic Face Lift 171

\(U) The Biggest Snakes of All --- The Navy Almost Builds

an Electronic Bombe 173

\(U) The Serpent and Friends 173

\(V) The Revenge of the Enigma --- or Electronics

Is Inescapable 177

\(U) Beyond Cribs: the Statistical Bombe 178

\(U) No Escaping Electronics, Enigma Meets the Cobra 180

\(U) The Navy\'s Duenna 180

\(U) From Relays to Tubes, Rosen Gets His Chance 182

\(V) Engineering Pride and Peacetime Priorities 183

\(U) Keeping the Faith: the Return of the Film Machines .. . 184

\(V) The Revenge of the Codes, Again 184

\(U) More Numbers Than Ever Before 186

\(U) Dr. Bush, Your Best Friend Is Really the Army 189

\(V) The Great 5202 190

\(U) Beyond the Comparators lgi

\(U) The Machine That Wasn\'t 191

Chapter 7(U) The Magic Continues

\(U) Would History Repeal Itself? 199

\(V) What There Wasn\'t 200

\(U) Signs of Some Appreciation 201

\(V) More MAGIC: Cryptanalysis Continues as Before 202

\(U) A Cryptologic Future: Architecture and Ambiguity

and Budgets 203

\(U) The Enigma Is Dead (We Think):

. 204

Long Live the

1;

\(V) A Hangover from Another Time 205

PL. 86-36




r.L. ob-ob

\(U) Mrs. O\'Malleu\'s Wayward Son 206

(S//SI) The Grand I \\Machine 208

\(U) Hecate\'s Impressive Competitor 211

\(U) The Universal RAMs 211

\(U) The Illusive Matrix 212

\(U) It\'s a Nice Idea, Dr. von Neuman, But 212

\(U) Faith Without Institutions: Slides, Sleds and Skates .. .214 (U)
Faith and an Institution: the Chance to Begin an Era . . 218

\(U) A Bright Hope for Hooper\'s Dream 220

\(U) The Grand Machine of Its Time, the New Comparator . . 221

\(U) Meanwhile, a Last Chance for Microfilm 223

\(U) Finally, the Electronic Bombe 223

Chapter 8 (U) Courage and Chaos: SIGINT and the Computer Revolution

\(V) It Wasn\'t Safe at the Cutting Edge 233

\(U) An Idea Differed 233

\(U) Goodbye Dr. Bush, Hello Professor von Neuman 236

\(U) A Summer in Philadelphia - an Exciting One 238

\(U) Buy a Computer, Now 241

\(U) Little JTianks for That Memory 244

\(U) Saving a Reputation through Logic 247

\(U) The Army\'s Problem 248

\(U) Stratum\'s Dream Revisited 251

\(U) So Much for Simplicity 253

\(U) Abner\'s Not Quite Best Friend 254

\(U) Abner by Inertia 255

\(U) Abner\'s Bad Temper 256

(U)And Then Came 257

Chapter 9 (U) Wandering into Ti\'ouble

\(U) A Cryptoanalytic Future 263

\(U) The Worst of Times 263

\(U) The Magic Continues 265

\(U) At Last, the Electronic Bombe - Perhaps 266

\(U) Without Magic and without Many Friends 268

\(U) The End of an ERA 269

\(V) ERA\'s Treasures 270

\(U) SIGINT Loses Another Friend 271

\(U) An Old Friend\'s Burdens 272

\(U) A Desperate Search for \'\"Depth\" 274

\(U) Wanderers and Nomads and Chaos 276




\(U) If You Can\'t Trust Someone from

the Adams Family, Then 278

\(U) Failure upon Failure 280

Chapter 10 (U) A Matter of Faith

\(U) Would Science or an Old Tactician Save the Agency? .. . 285

\(U) Rushing \"Bits,\" Not Even \"-Bytes,\" into the Agency 285

\(U) Canine Guards the Fort 287

\(U) EnterTom Watson and IBM 289

\(U) A Machine for Us, Perhaps 292

\(U) One Big Machine Beats Out Many Little Ones 293

\(U) An ERA by Any Other Name Is IBM 295

\(U) Is Half a Farmer Better Than 296

\(U) St. Paul in Mohansic 297

\(U) Bucks Talk: the Favored Sister Gets the Attention 297

\(U) A Data Factory 298

\(U) Not a Farmer, a Nomad 299

\(U) Engineering Is Not Science, at least to the SAB 300

\(U) You Can Take Science Out of the Agency, But Can You .302 (U) Almost
in Science - Would Lightning Be

the Other Harvest 305

\(U) What Kind of Friend Are You, Dr. Baker? 307

\(U) Dr. Baker\'s Half-an-Institute 309

(U)A Harvest ofOverexpectations 310

\(U) ERA\'s and the Shop -floor Cryppies7 Revenge 313

\(U) Technology and Faith, 1962 316







Foreivord

mmmmmmmm - •• •\* »■ • \*• \* \>\~ g&mm\$tm

Y.\^.A :-3\'»■,.\#WiWxusp\*\*

\(U) Conventional wisdom about NSA and computers has it, as a retired NSA
senior officer once wrote me, \"In the early days, NSA and its
predecessor organizations drove the computer industry. In the 1960s, we
kept pace with it. We started losing ground in the \'70s, and in the
\'80s we struggled to keep up with the industry.\"

\(U) True, but underlying this, in each decade the cryptologic
organizations experienced a wide range of successes and failures,
positives and negatives. If, as slang puts it, \"they won some, lost
some, and some got rained out,\" all of this experience is worth serious
examination by students of computers, cryptanalysis, and NSA history.

\(U) The current volume, Dr. Colin Burke\'s It Wasn\'t All Magic: The
Early Struggle to Automate Cryptanalysis, 193OS-1960S, contains a view
of the first decades of computer development that is broad and deep and
rich.

\(U) It begins in the 1930s as American and British intelligence
officials confronted new cryptanalytic and cryptographic challenges, and
adapted some intriguing new concepts to their analysis. It carries the
story to the flexible and fast systems of the late 1950s and early
1960s.

\(U) Dr. Burke follows and links the development of automatic data
processing from the critical conceptual work of the 1930s through the
practical experiments born of national necessity in the world war to the
postwar development and the previously untold story of NSA\'s postwar
computer development. Along the way, he has rescued from obscurity some
important successes - and some important failures - in cryptanalytic
machinery from World War II.

\(U) All too often, discussions of NSAs computer development treat only
the mainstream, ignoring the problems, failures, dead ends and
might-havebeens, in order to concentrate on successes. In the present
volume, however, key components of Dr. Burke\'s story and important for
our knowledge are the machines which didn\'t work or which never had
progeny, and why this was so. Just as important are Dr. Burke\'s
cautionary tales about the influence of international and interservice
rivalry on plans and procedures. Technical limitations and technical
opportunities shaped much of the development of computing equipment, but
the story is also replete with instances of man-made barriers and
baleful bureaucratic bypaths that wielded great influence during much of
this development.

\(U) A word about how this manuscript came to

be.

\(U) A no less important factor than the information and analysis in this
current volume is that it represents an objective view of NSAs computer
history by a writer not from NSA or one of the Service Cryptologic
Elements. The author, a university professor, had no stake in either
defending or besmirching decisions made fifty years ago or the
organizations or people who made them.

\(U) The Center for Cryptologic History, between 1990 and 1999,
administered a program to bring outside academics or researchers to the
CCH for special projects. The CCH sponsored six Scholars in Residence in
that period; of the six, the first two received security clearances for
work on classified projects. The others remained uncleared and worked
only with declassified materials.

(U//FQUO) Dr. Colin B. Burke was the second of the two cleared scholars.


Page xi



(UZ/FOUO\^Dr. Burke\'s professional biography is given at the end of the
book. Note that as a professor of both history and computer research
techniques, Dr. Burke became one of the pioneers in the field of
computer history.

(U//fOUQj As background reading, T recommend not only Dr. Burke\'s own
unclassified publications, available commercially, but two classified
histories available from the Center for Cryptologic History: Thomas R.
Johnson, American Cryptology during the Cold War (4 vols) and Michael L.
Peterson, BOURBON to Black Friday.

DAVID A. HATCH

Director,

Center for Cryptologic History




\(U) Introduction

\(U) Before NSA Opened Its Files

\(U) I am one of those \"outsiders\" I talk about so much in the later
chapters of this book. I was fortunate to be brought into the National
Security Agency as one of the Center for Cryptologic History\'s first
Scholars in Residence. I was borrowed from my university because I had
spent a decade working on the history of computers at NSA\'s
predecessors. I even had the courage to write a book about the subject. 1

\(U) That monograph was on the machines, policies, and relationships that
led to the U.S. Navy\'s cryptanalytic machine (computer) program in
World War II. The book was also about the first major attempts to
automate the American library. It had to be about both because the same
people built bibliographic and cryptanalytic machines.

\(U) My study covered events in the history of the machines through the
1940s, but its focus was on the period between 1930 and 1945. An
important conclusion was that the relationship between the efforts of
America\'s codebreakers and the emergence of the modern digital
electronic computer was more complex than had been thought. The navy\'s
cryptanalysts were in a push-me, pullme situation. Their work made
mechanization a necessity, but the pressures of war and the refusal of
the government bureaucracy to sponsor longterm research and development
programs prevented the navy from becoming the inventor of the modern
computer.

DuUid Piuni. NOA/COSM ih;i m

Dated 2.4 I\\-l\>i uai y 199O DulaAsify On. Xi---

\(U) During World War II American cryptanalysts built some of the most
sophisticated electronic machines in the world, but the need to address
cryptanalytic crises blocked them from creating the general-purpose
digital electronic computer.

\(U) Just as my book was published, I was asked to come to the National
Security Agency. One purpose of my year in residence was to see if it
was possible to write a complete history of computers at the Agency. The
goal was a monograph that covered the entire life of NSA and its
predecessors. The thought of finally being able to see the many highly
classified documents that had been withheld from me more than balanced
the pledge I had to give: I had to promise to refrain from publishing
without the approval of NSA\'s censors.

\(U) The Stacks Were Not All They\...

\(U) I began my residency by surveying the Agency\'s archive holdings and
by rereading the few synthetic works that had been declassified. The
comprehensiveness of the archive holdings was critical because unless
enough of the correct type of documents had been saved and indexed,
there was little chance to produce a history of the post-World War II
era. Useful documents from the 1950s through the 1980s were of special
importance because the Agency had allowed almost nothing about its
operations in the last forty years to be made public. There was not even
a counterpart to the informative but very unhandy collection of
documents on the pre-1946 period released to the National Archives, the
Special Research History series.

\(U) As I examined the collections, I was pleased to find that the
materials I needed to





revise my earlier work were plentiful and well organized. There were
several contemporary studies of computer efforts up to 1945 that were
technically as well as historically enlightening,

\(U) I was also happy to discover that although I had not been correct in
all the details about the early American cryptanalytic machines, I had
come quite close. I concluded that I had drawn an acceptable overview of
the computer efforts of the army and navy cryptologic agencies up to
1950.

\(U) But I was less than content with the materials for the postwar era.
I decided that it would be impossible to tell the type of story about
the forty-five years since the Korean War that I had done for the
earlier period, at least not within one year.

\(U) However, there were many documents, several oral histories, and the
work of Samuel S. Snyder to provide a basis for a history of computers
within NSA up to the early 1960s.

\(U) Ask What the Agency Did for\...

\(U) Samuel Snyder was one of the founding fathers of machine
cryptanalysis. He joined the army\'s cryptologic unit in the 1930s and
remained at the Agency, becoming important to many of its computer
projects of the 1940s and 1950s. His experience, his desire to document
the Agency\'s computer history, and his commitment to the welfare of NSA
made its administrators receptive to his requests to be allowed the time
and resources during the late 1960s and early 1970s to write about the
Agency\'s computer history.

\(U) Mr. Snyder completed several works. They ranged from sketches of the
history of the army\'s first electronic computer, Abner, to a survey of
the general-purpose electronic computers the Agency had built or
purchased. The study of the Kgp\" computers seemed so important and fit
so well with the Agency\'s desire to obtain good

publicity that it was declassified and, in various forms, published in
the open literature. 2

\(U) Mr. Snyder\'s work showed the contributions of NSA to the
development of computer technology and to the emergence of the American
computer industry. It made it clear that NSA had been a major sponsor of
technical advances. like several other large government agencies, its
computer purchases and its research and development contracts helped
establish America as the world\'s leading computer manufacturer. He also
made it clear that NSA had been at the cutting edge of computer
technology and architecture.

\(U) I was very tempted to just deepen Sam Snyder\'s work on post-1950
automation, but as I went through the hundreds of record boxes at the
archives and as T began to reflect on their contents, I decided that I
had to do something different. I had to take an alternative view of the
Agency\'s computer history.

\(U) Because of the need to guard NSA\'s cryptanalytic methods, Mr.
Snyder could not discuss the reasons for the development of the devices
he included in his published works. Just as the Agency cannot reveal its
cryptologic successes without endangering them, Snyder could not give
either the \"why\" or, in many cases, the \"what\" of the Agency
computers to the public. The jobs the NSA computers had to perform and
the decision processes that led them to be part of the famous collection
of machines that once resided in the Agency\'s \"basement\" had to be
left out of his studies.

\(U) He certainly could not discuss what were and are the most intriguing
machines at NSA, its dozens of special-purpose computers, ones whose
architecture embodies a cryptanalytic process. Doing more than listing
their cover names would have revealed what methods the Agency was using
and what targets it was attacking. Neither the NSA nor the British
intelligence agencies were responsible for the initial release of
information





about MAGIC and ULTRA. The stories were told by others.

\(U) The restrictions on Mr. Snyder had another influence. Because he was
forced to divorce SIGINT and computer history, the machines he described
seemed to have emerged as a result of an indestructible synergy between
the Agency, the computer industry, and America\'s scientific community.

\(U) My knowledge of the course of technological advancement in the
cryptologic arena in the 1930s and 1940s led me to doubt that the
postwar era\'s machine history was so smooth and problem free.

\(U) There was something more fundamental about Mr. Snyder\'s approach
that led me to search for alternative ways to interpret the documents
that were emerging from the NSA archives and the offices of old hands at
the Agency. Although Snyder\'s articles are invaluable, his
interpretation seemed unlikely to be able to bring together the policy,
the cryptanalytic, and technological histories of SIGINT
computerization.

\(U) The emphasis in his public articles was on what the Agency\'s
computer efforts did for others, especially the computer industry. But I
had a clear sense that I could tell the story of computers only by using
an approach that was the near opposite of Sam Snyder\'s. Focusing
onNSA\'s role in transferring technology and supporting commercial
computer development, I concluded, hid as much or more than it revealed.

\(U) Ask Not What the Agency Can Do for\...

\(U) To understand computerization at NSA the question should not be
\"what did NSA do for the computer industry?\" but \"what was it that
the industry could not or would not do for NSA?\"

\(U) The second question leads an investigator into the many technical,
institutional, and politi

cal struggles that the Agency faced as it attempted to keep up with the
cryptologic capabilities of its adversaries. It helps to explain why NSA
has had to build so many special computers, why it invested in several
technological misadventures, and why it had to involve itself in some
unusual relationships with private industry and academia. The question
also helps to integrate the political history of NSA with its drive to
advance mathematical cryptanalysis.

(U//FOUO) For example, using the \"couldn\'t do\" approach to Agency
projects led me to an understanding ofNSA\'s great computer adventure,
the Harvest system. It also helped uncover the Agency\'s reason for
creating its high-powered mathematical think tank at Princeton. Both the
computer and the institution were the result of much more than a desire
to extend the reach of formal cryptanalysis; they were born of intense
political pressures on the Agency, and they were grand compromises
rather than perfect solutions to abstract problems.

\(U) Spotlighting what the computer industry could not do for signals
intelligence also helps to integrate the Agency\'s computer and
cryptanalytic histories. Putting them together shows that inventing and
developing an effective technology for SIGINT has been difficult and, at
times, agonizing.

(T0//0I//REL) The \"couldn\'t do\" question also illuminates one of the
most fascinating aspects of the history of computers at the National
Security Agency: the drive to define and implement a computer
architecture that was radically different from the classic design that
is now called the von Neumann architecture. Since at least 1946,
American cryptanalysts have done much more than use parallel and
pipeline processing; they have sought, and came close to achieving, a
unique architecture for a cryptanalytic general-purpose computer.
Because the computer industry was unwilling to develop machines that
served only one customer, NSA was forced to





design and build not only single-purpose machines but its own versions
of a general-purpose computer. Its Sled and Dervish family of high-speed
devices reflects the Agency\'s special needs and challenges.
Unfortunately, creating an all-purpose special NSA computer was too much
for the Agency, given its resources. Its famed Harvest computer, for
example, was only a partial representation of a tme \"cryptanalytic\"
computer, partially because the computer industry could not focus on
Agency needs.

\(U) When the \"couldn\'t do\" question is extended to American
universities, it becomes easier to understand the difficult relationship
between NSA and \"outside\" scientists and their institutions. Finding
and utilizing academic talent was very difficult for the Agency.
Professors did not rush to NSA before or after World War II, and they
did not pursue much research that was of direct help to operational
cryptanalysis. Devising ways to preserve the Agency\'s secrets and its
independence while channeling the contributions of academics proved to
be very difficult.

\(U) Inspiration and Patience

\(U) Something besides the relationships with the commercial computer
industry and academia has to be called on to explain NSA\'s computer
history. To show why the Agency created its own computer architecture
and why it accepted some technological retrogressions calls for a bit of
cryptanalytic muckraking. The craft of code and cipher breaking has to
be stripped of its romanticism.

\(U) The stories of the successful American attack on Japan\'s diplomatic
ciphers before World War II (PURPLE-MAGIC) and the triumph over the
German ENIGMA-ULTRA are used as popular models for the way cryptanalytic
work proceeds. The popular view shares much, in terms of fundamentals,
with the public view of Agency computer development.

\(U) In the typical story, codebreaking successes such as MAGIC and ULTRA
came about because of the quick and intense work of a handful of
geniuses armed with brain power and little else. The common image is
that once the likes of William F. Friedman and Alan Turing had their
flashes of insight, a flow of precious information (and only valuable
information) was captured, processed by a hastily constructed but
ingenious machine, and then directed to decision makers.

\(U) Such an image of a heroic cryptanalysis is far from being true or
useful. Cryptanalytic and technological victories have not come as
easily as that. Even during the glorious codebreaking days of World War
II, America\'s cryptanalysts barely kept up with their enemies.

\(U) There have been moments when great breakthroughs have led to
critically important messages. And the penetration of some systems, such
as the U-boat \"E,\" led to a stream of immediately important
information. But typical cryptanalysis was and remains a continuing
struggle to discover patterns and to make sense out of mountains of raw
data.

\(U) Most cryptanalytic solutions have come only after years of the most
tedious and disdainful work. The intellectuals that Britain gathered at
Bletchley Park had to perform mind-deadening menial computing tasks
hoping that all their labor would reveal mistakes by the German
cryptographers and patterns within message texts. They had no magical
mathematical formula that eliminated the need for massive data
processing. Even when a system was penetrated, creating useful
information from intercepts called for large-scale data handling.

(8//3I) During the first decades of the Cold War, when America\'s
enemies made the ENIGMA systems seem like cryptanalytic child\'s play,
NSA could not re-create a MAGIC. It had to wring information out of
traffic analysis, plain text, and even clear voice messages. That forced
the Agency





to become one of the world\'s largest data processors.

\(U) On top of the special computing needs of cryptanalysis, NSA\'s
insatiable need for what many times was unique data processing
equipment, made it a computer leader.

\(U) The National Security Agency has not been such an important
influence in computer development because of its mathematical wizardry
or because it has a mandate to transfer technology to the private
sector. The Agency\'s contributions have come because of the unique
nature of cryptanalysis and SIGINT and the increasing difficulty of
fulfilling a central responsibility: the production of signals
intelligence. The Agency has sponsored supercomputers for mathematics
since the 1940s, but so have many others. The critical contributions of
the Agency have come because of the special needs of operational
cryptanalysis and SIGINT data processing.

\(U) There Wasn\'t Enough Magic

\(U) In addition to the \"couldn\'t do\" perspective, a useful way to
understand the history of NSA\'s computers is to place them within the
context of the struggles to overcome the particular machines and methods
of America\'s determined and increasingly clever opponents.

(U//FOUQ) The National Security Agency has never bought or built
computers for abstract reasons. Its computers, even those for its
hushhush think tank at Princeton, were acquired to respond to very
practical and immediate needs and opportunities. From the early 1930s,
when the first IBM tabulating machines were brought into the secret
rooms of the Navy\'s OP-20-G, to NSA\'s massive computer projects of the
1950s, and to the 1990s when the NSA computer building is filled with
massively parallel and pipe-lined special-purpose computers, the
Agency\'s machines have been for the solution of problems. There have
been moments when the Agency has

been allowed a bit of a luxury to pursue long-term and general
technological explorations, but they have been rare and were always
under the threat posed by a shift in national, political, or military
policy.

\(U) Despite all that, NSA has arguably been the largest single user of
advanced computing machines in the world. It had to be. And because of
the unique problems it faced and methods it used, it also became one of
the most sophisticated sponsors of new computer and electronic
equipment. To do its job it had to invest hundreds of millions of
dollars into research and development.

\(U) A Story with Only a Few Acronyms

\(U) The story of the Agency\'s struggle for automation from 1930 to the
beginning of the 1960s could become an exercise in the use of acronyms.
NSA and its predecessors were bureaucracies with dozens of subdivisions
and name changes. The designation for the army\'s crypto branch, for
example, was altered several times before the end of World War II.
Following such changes is too much to ask of a reader who wishes to gain
the \"big picture\" of cryptanalytic computer history.

\(U) To keep the text readable, I decided to use as few names as possible
for agencies and their subdivisions. For example, the army\'s
cryptanalytic branch is called the SIS until the formation of NSA

\(U) I have also kept the goal of readability in mind when describing
machines and processes. I have tried to use common terms whenever
possible, even at the cost of glossing over some technical distinctions.
I have even used the terms SIGINT and COMINT interchangeably, except in
the contexts in which the differences between the two are significant to
understanding NSA\'s history.





\(V) Two Decades before the Computer

\(U) Notes

\(U) I have also tried to use consistent terminology, although the story
of the struggle to automate American cryptanalysis begins two decades
before the modem electronic digital computer emerged, NSA\'s automation
story begins in 1930 when a bright and devoted navy man, Stanford
Caldwell Hooper, realized that mechanized cipher-making was outpacing
cryptanalysis. In his attempt to modernize the navy\'s cryptanalytic
branch, OP-20-G, he engaged a problem that proved difficult for
America\'s codebreakers for over a generation: How can a secret agency
find and use the best talents and technology in the outside world?
Hooper tried to solve that problem by creating anew type of relationship
with academics, specifically the man who became the czar of America\'s
new Big Science of World War II and the first years of the Cold War -
Vannevar Bush of MIT.

1\. (U) Colin B. Burke, Information and Secrecy: Vannevar Bush, Ultra,
and the Other Memex, Metuchen, NJ, & London: The Scarecrow Press, 1994.

2\. (U) For example, Samuel S. Snyder, \"Computer Advances Pioneered by
Cryptologic Organizations,\" Annals of the History of Computing, 2
(1980): 61.

Colin Burke December 1994





