Chapter 8 (U) Courage and Chaos: SIGINT and the Computer Revolution

\(U) It Wasn\'t Safe at the Cutting Edge

\(U) Well before the plans for Goldberg and Sled had matured, OP-20-G,
joined a bit later by SIS, started a great adventure. They became part
of what many see as one of the most important technological revolutions
in history. The SIGINT agencies became active players in the attempt to
make a technical fantasy come true - to build a universal machine. \"G\"
and the SIS, along with several other military and civilian agencies,
became prime movers in the early stages of the computer revolution.
Establishing that historic foothold was not easy for either SIGINT
group.

\(U) An idea had emerged and became somewhat formalized outside of the
intelligence community by 1945. It was going to be possible to have a
high-speed electronic computer that could mimic any mathematical or
logical process. With a rapidly changeable program, it had the potential
to be a machine for every purpose, from calculation to machine control.
The key to the machine\'s flexibility was its simplicity. It was to have
very, very few hardwired functions, perhaps just the four basic
arithmetic ones, and a few that allowed the movement of data between the
input-output components, memory, and the single central processor. That
and the organization of the machine around the binary system would, it
was hoped, make it relatively inexpensive and allow it to become a
massproduced product. With one piece of hardware that could be made to
imitate any machine through an inexpensive and easily changed set of
instructions, the new computer had a great future. It would replace all
other calculation and, perhaps, data processing devices.

\(U) The ideas for the universal computer that began to take definite
shape in England and the United States in 1946 were very appealing. As
soon

as they heard of them, mathematicians and engineers within \"G\" and the
SIS pleaded with their superiors to make programmed computers part of
the SIGINT arsenal. They were persuasive. By 1947 both agencies had
committed themselves to acquiring general-purpose \"computers.\"

\(U) Neither agency realized what traumas they would have to go through
to obtain them, however. Especially in the case of the SIS, the postwar
experience was as anxiety-filled as the trials that Hooper and Wenger
had gone through in the mid-1930s when they sought Vannevar Bush\'s
help.

\(U) Because Wenger had been able to set up a semicaptive engineering
corporation in 1946, OP20-G had an easier time than the army did. But
even \"G\" and its Engineering Research Associates had some very tough
moments trying to make the new computer come to life.

\(U) That had not been foreseen in 1946. After learning of the
possibilities of the new architecture, each agency had expected that
outsiders would provide all that was needed. That was naive. The SIGINT
agencies soon found it necessary to do much, much more than they
anticipated. Because of the chaos that marked the development of the
computer industry in the postwar era, both had to create their own
machines.

\(U) An Idea Differed

\(U) In 1945 while the ambitious Goldberg\'s technology, if not its
architecture, shifted with the appearance of technical innovations, and
while machines like O\'Malley were being constructed for immediate
problems, another and more adventuresome project began at \"G.\"1

I UP bblKKH/COMINTJmEL USA, AU&, LAN OBR AND NZU/XI




\(U) Duenna and the other \"electronic\" machines of the last two years
of the war, combined with the knowledge of what other computer projects
in the nation were attempting, gave the \"M\" group some ideas about a
general-purpose computer. It was to be one much more flexible than
Bush\'s older Rockefeller Analyzer or even his purely electronic Rapid
Arithmetic Machine.

\(U) When they had a few moments for reflection in 1944 and 1945,
Engstrom and others in \"M\" speculated about what they could accomplish
if they could find a large and fast memory, such as the vastly improved
versions of the delay lines they were already experimenting with, to add
to an electronic processor. While RCA\'s Jan Rachman\'s new idea for an
all-electronic computer was rejected as almost \"screwball,\" \"M\'s\"
men kept thinking about the future. If a large memory with a speed that
came close to that of the electronic processor could be found, then they
thought a general-purpose computer was a possibility.

\(U) But unless there was a high-speed memory, electronic processors
would have to remain as special-purpose devices. Until the software
could keep up with the speed of the processor, there was little need for
electronics. If an electronic computer depended upon tape readers or the
like for its directions, it could be no faster than the slow mechanical
components.

\(U) The input speeds of the best tape and card readers of the era were
orders less than electronic processors. That limitation was compounded
by the serial nature of both technologies. It was impractical to ask
tape and card systems to back up to previous positions and repeat the
reading of data or \"instructions.\" A universal computer needed a
memory that could support \"go to\" commands because tapes and cards
could not fulfill that need.

(TO// 3D The limitations imposed by the absence of high-speed memory
were one of the reasons why the Sled architecture seemed so appealing.
With special \"boxes\" hooked together through plugboard programs,
processing was not dependent upon the nonexistent memory. The absence of
memory was also one of the reasons why IBM and other business machines
manufacturers confined their postwar electronic offerings to limited and
special-purpose attachments, such as multipliers and dividers that
hooked onto tabulators.2

\(U) In 1945, any engineer who thought about moving further than the
Aiken-IBM combination of motors, shafts, and tape readers, or the Moore
School\'s set ofENIAC special-purpose boxes \"programmed\" through
resetting huge electrical cables, had to have a great deal of faith. He
had to believe that some technological hints would soon become viable
and affordable hardware. There were some indications that such dreams
might come true. But in 1945-6 they were just indications.

\(U) Some thought that delay lines, tubes filled with chemicals, could be
reengineered to serve as memories. The young experts at the University
of Pennsylvania who were building the ENIAC felt they could convince
delay lines from radar sets to behave well enough to hold programs as
well as the data needed for immediate processing. That was a courageous
commitment because those \"acoustic\" delay lines were very
temperamental. It was very difficult to regulate the timing of the
pulses that flowed through them. Slight changes in ambient temperature
caused serious distortions. Also, it was difficult to monitor the
behavior of the crystals that sensed the data \"pulses\" at each end of
the tube. Even when all the technical difficulties were eliminated, a
fundamental problem remained. The tubes could hold only a few \"bits.\"

\(U) There were some other memory possibilities being discussed at the
end of the war. One





was to use a variation of the emerging television technology to store
and recover \"dots\" of information on an oscilloscope-like screen. If
it could be made to work, it would be an ultra-fast memory. A computer
would not have to \"wait\" until the information it needed cycled past a
sensing station. It would run at electronic speeds and would allow
parallel data transmission.3

\(U) There were more esoteric ideas for powerful memories, such as RCA\'s
Selectron and the use of magnetics, but they were even less ready than
the other alternatives.

f6} Although the engineers at OP-20-G knew of the technological limits,
they could not pass up a chance to at least survey universal computer
options. John Howard formalized some of the ideas in a June 1945
memorandum; then, along with the \"G\" mathematician, C. B. Tompkins,
toured all the East Coast computer projects looking for more ideas.4 But
little came of their trips. \"G\" was too busy to explore other than
cryptanalytic machines. That remained true for several months after the
war ended. Its workload even prevented \*G\" from sending a
representative to one of the earliest postwar computer meetings.

\(U) When Howard Engstrom received an invitation to participate in a
major navy symposium on computers, he replied that \"G\" had done little
of the type of work that was to be discussed and that he and his crew
were too busy to attend.

\(U) The urge to explore the possibilities of a general-purpose computer
continued. But little could be achieved. \"G\" found it difficult to
acquire connections to the outsiders, especially the academics, who
seemed to be taking the first major steps towards creating the modern
computer. \"G\'s\" old scholarly friend and go-between, Vannevar Bush,
had stepped back from OP-20-G when the war broke out and did not try to
reestablish the 1930s relationship. That left \"G\" without a
prestigious outside scientist who could

provide the critical endorsements speculative projects needed.

\(U) Bush also decided not to return to MIT. He remained in Washington,
acting as something of an academic elder statesman and high-level
science policy maker until his retirement. Among his many contributions,
he gave advice on the future of science in the military. In addition,
Bush was frequently called upon to make recommendations concerning the
integration of the nation\'s intelligence services. His role as a
science advisor to President Eisenhower also played an important part in
SIGINT mechanization in the 1950s.5

\(U) Bush stayed at quite a distance from the computer developments of
the postwar era. He also stayed away from OP-20-G, except for a few
courtesy visits that Joseph Wenger arranged. One reason for Bush\'s
arm\'s length relationship was a very heated argument with the Bureau of
Ships about the Comparator. Soon after the war the bureau decided that
it should be protected by patents. Bush was sent all the necessary
paperwork to sign. He did so, but only after the deepest protests to the
navy about revealing precious secrets and about imposing upon him.6

\(U) OP-20-G had lost another friend. Stanford C. Hooper was in
semiretirement. He was now old and ill, and he had to spend much time in
Florida. He was acting as a consultant to several small electronics
firms, including ERA, however. He still had the ear of many Washington
influentials, but he could no longer aggressively fight to link OP-20-G,
the scientific establishment, and the large corporations. In fact, he
had become a bit soured on the corporations and acidemia. He had come to
favor small private companies as the only guarantor of innovation and
responsiveness.

\(U) Meanwhile, the other part of OP-20-G\'s old university-computer
connection, Bush\'s \"boys,\" had migrated to the \"captive\"
corporation, ERA. Howard, Coombs, and Steinhardt were





keeping up with computer developments, but ERA\'s first contracts and
the imperative to develop a \"cryptanalytic\" machine kept them too busy
to act as computer innovators. As a result, their 1945 general-purpose
computer aspirations languished until mid-1946.

\(U) Then, \"G\" developed a new and energetic computer champion. At the
same time, it found someone with great enough scientific status to
validate its request to acquire something which, in the mid-1940s,
seemed more fanciful than Bush\'s 1930s machine.

\(U) Goodbye Dr. Bush, Hello Professor von Neumann

\(U) Just as the Goldberg project was launched in St. Paul and as
Wenger\'s own research group was deciding whether or not to have someone
build an electronic Super Bombe, one oP\'G\'s\" mathematicians, James T.
Pendergrass, enrolled in a summer institute on the programmable, digital
electronic computer.7

\(U) His inclusion in the Philadelphia meeting was almost an
afterthought. Apparently \"G\" had not been asked to send someone until
a few weeks before the Moore School Lectures began. Pendergrass had
intended to spend much of the summer on vacation, but when his boss,
Howard Campaigne, called him, he found it impossible to refuse the
assignment. He rushed to the University of Pennsylvania and immediately
began sending reports to Campaigne.

\(U) Howard Campaigne was one ofthose bright young men who had been
brought into \"G\" early in the war. Like his friend, Joe Eachus, he
spent much time in England.8 And like Eachus he became deeply involved
with the RAM program. Deciding not to go to ERA he became a civilian
scientist within \"G.\" He helped shape and direct \"G\'s\" postwar
research agenda. By 1946 he was one of Joseph Wenger\'s right-hand men
and was respected enough to be allowed to act as a repre

sentative of \"G\" to the outside world. That was what caused him to
attend an important Navy Department conference in spring 1946.

\(U) The conference was on the nature of large-scale computers. The major
address was given by the man who would soon equal or exceed Vannevar
Bush\'s status in the scientific-political realm, John von Neumann.9

\(U) John von Neumann was perhaps the most famous of the new applied
mathematicians. He had migrated from Europe in the 1930s to join the
likes of Albert Einstein at America\'s only true research institute, a
place where scholars set their own agendas, von Neumann became one of
the \"scientifically anointed\" at the Institute for Advanced Study at
Princeton.

\(U) The first rumblings of war led the Institute and von Neumann to move
far beyond their abstract academic origins. During World War II, von
Neumann made important contributions to the atomic bomb project. As a
result of that involvement, he became entangled in the ENIAC computer
effort at the University of Pennsylvania.

\(U) The University of Pennsylvania\'s World War II contract with Army
Ordnance for the ENIAC had come almost by chance, just as the NDRC ended
its computer program, and as firms such as RCA rejected pleas to turn
their hardpressed engineers to computer projects. Ordnance was in need
of a way to speed the calculation of firing tables. With no other
alternative, the army accepted the proposal of two young engineers at
the Moore School. They promised to build an electronic version of
Bush\'s great Differential Analyser. Fortunately for the history of
computers, John Mauchly and Presper Eckert were given a great deal of
freedom and time. Their much delayed postwar delivery of the relatively
special-purpose ENIAC was not treated as a sign of failure, and their
plan for a programmable





universal electronic computer was quickly funded.

\(U) With the help of John von Neumann, they started the project (EDVAC)
and began seminars that attracted the pre- and postwar generations of
computer builders.10 von Neumann\'s stature in the scientific and
military communities had grown so much that his presence gave the Moore
School\'s computer efforts the highest credibility. While working on the
design of what is regarded as the first true universal computer, the
EDVAC, the original leaders of the ENIAC project, Mauchly and Eckert,
had become estranged from the university\'s administration and, to some
degree, from John von Neumann.

\(U) Von Neumann, whose importance increased in the postwar years, also
became alienated from the University of Pennsylvania. He decided to
found his own computer initiative. He was soon able to convince his old
academic home, the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) at Princeton, to
accept several military and civilian grants and to create a center to
house his attempt to design and build his own computer. His \"IAS\"
machine was intended to serve the needs of applied mathematicians and
physicists.

\(U) Von Neumann did not confine himself to computer building. He became
a major figure in Cold War science and policy. He advised all of the
American leaders of the era, and he served on the most important
science-related boards. He even became a good friend of OP-20-G and
later NSA, serving on their expert panels. He gave them much technical
and political advice throughout the 1940s and 1950s. His contributions
included more than hints about new computer technologies. He frequently
urged the SIGINT agencies to sponsor fundamental electronic research to
be conducted by leading academics.\"

\(U) While von Neumann was forging his Cold War reputation, the Moore
School had begun its own machine, the EDVAC. Sponsored by Army

Ordnance, EDVAC was to have the simplest of architecture. Although it
was intended to be an operational machine for the Aberdeen Proving
Grounds, it was also something of a testbed. A central goal of the
project was to prove that a universal machine could be made to work and
to do it quickly. Therefore, EDVAC was designed as simply as possible.

\(U) EDVAC was a binary machine that depended upon a serial acoustic
delay-line memory. That memory was to hold both programs and data. The
acoustic technology limited the machine to about 1,000 words of fast
memory. Technological limits also dictated much of the EDVAC\'s internal
organization. Trying to avoid the problems caused by the high failure
rate of vacuum tubes, EDVAC\'s internal structure was made as sparse as
possible. It had just one-third the number of tubes used in the ENIAC.

\(U) To keep the number of components at an absolute minimum, the machine
had only a few built-in instructions. That was a wise decision. Each
\"instruction\" demanded dozens of tubes and hundreds ofhandwired
connections. And each increased the computer\'s cost and multiplied the
probability that it would experience a failure well before any
significant computational task could be completed.

\(U) In addition to keeping the number of components to a minimum,
EDVAC\'s designers limited the machine to the serial transmission and
processing of data (one bit at a time). Serial processing also reduced
the amount of failureprone electronics. But it carried the price of
slower processing rates.

\(U) EDVAC\'s designers made another tradeoff that favored simplicity
over speed. The machine\'s operations were based on \"fixed clock\"
timing. That meant that no matter how little time one operation took,
succeeding work had to wait until the next clock pulse.





\(U) EDVAC\'s planners tried to keep their task manageable by
concentrating on building a machine for mathematicians. EDVAC was not
intended to be a data processor. The EDVAC engineers did not try to
solve the many problems involved in making input and output rates
approach electronic speeds. Slow tape and card readers gave the machine
its data, and its even more primal cardpunches and teletypewriters
displayed results. Although one of the first computer programs written
by the ENIAC-EDVAC group was for sorting, EDVAC\'s builders never
pretended that it could replace tabulator equipment.

\(U) While the EDVAC\'s designs were being set, the ENIAC\'s parents,
Eckert and Mauchly, left the University of Pennsylvania and attempted to
found and keep afloat their own for-profit computer company. After more
than six years of anxiety and tragedy, they completed the UNIVAC
computer.

\(U) The UNIVAC was also a delay-line, fixedclock machine, but it went
far beyond the EDVAC in terms of power and sophistication. One reason
for that was the UNIVAC\'s attempt to become \"the\" new business
machine, one to replace hundreds of tabulators. That called fcr the
development of much-enhanced I/O technology. Anew data processing
capability was to some extent achieved through the creation of magnetic
tape systems, a development that helps explain why the first UNIVAC did
not appear until 1951.

\(U) The goal of building a computer to replace the tabulators led to a
very historic decision by Eckert and Mauchly. Because they wanted to
maximize the speed of data processing, which typically demanded little
calculation on a great deal of information, they deviated from a purely
binary representation of numbers within the UNIVAC. It had what was
called at the time a \"decimal\" representation. Although UNIVAC used
binary circuits, a decimal format was imposed to speed the input-output
functions.

\(U) Eckert and Mauchly\'s commercial computer aspirations, as well as
John von Neumann\'s academic ones, were just emerging when the
University of Pennsylvania decided to host its historic summer 1946
Moore School conference. All those who had made contributions to
computing during the war were invited to hear presentations by von
Neumann and others who were outlining the computers of the future.

\(U) A Summer in Philadelphia - an Exciting One

\(U) It was probably Howard Campaigned attendance at an earlier (May)
navy symposium that made him aware of the Moore School conference. The
Washington meeting was where he first made contact with von Neumann and
where he realized that the general-purpose computer was going to be
built, with or without OP-20-G. Campaigne decided that \"G\" should at
least have a chance to be one of its sponsors.

\(U) He hurriedly arranged for some funds and then called his assistant,
James Pendergrass, asking him to attend the coming Philadelphia
symposium. Campaigne was unable to tell him much about what was to take
place in Philadelphia. As a result, much of what Pendergrass encountered
surprised as well as thrilled him.

\(U) During the Moore School\'s summer program, Pendergrass studied the
designs ofthe ENIAC and those for the much more advanced EDVAC. He
listened to the presentations ofthe other men who had begun to develop
universal electronic machines.

\(U) Coming from a physical sciences background and being an advocate for
applied mathematics, Pendergrass was especially taken with John von
Neumann\'s ideas, including his version of a programming language. When
von Neumann outlined the concept for his new Institute for Advanced
Study machine, Pendergrass became convinced that \"G\" had to have a von
Neumann


TOP 3C0RCTOCOMINT//RCL U3A, AU3, OAN ODR AND NZUX1


lOMybCKblJJCUMINIJJkEL US/

\\MD NZU/X1

::: {style="width: 67.2156862745098%;"}
:::

(IJ) UNIV& C

type of computer. He thought the von Neumann design was the best, the
one that would be the first to appear in hardware, and the one most
likely to be cloned by a manufacturer. Well before the Philadelphia
conference was concluded, Pendergrass convinced Howard Campaigne that
OP-20-G should have one of the \"new\" computers, specifically one with
a von Neumann architecture.

\(U) Pendergrass was not the only one who believed in the IAS design. The
mathematical and applied physics community took it as the model for
computers for the 1940s and early 1950s. The emerging von Neumann
architecture was especially attractive to mathematicians because it
promised to provide a much faster and more precise computer than other
designs of the era. It had the potential to be faster than the serial
type of machines by factors in the hundreds. At least five IAS computers
were copied in American universities and advanced research centers.

\(U) The IAS machine was not going to send or process data bit by bit,
nor was it going to make one operation wait for a \"clock.\" It was
going to send data simultaneously and would initiate an

operation as soon as the previous one finished. As or more important, it
was not going to be based on the limited delay-line memory, von Neumann
bet that RCA would keep to its pledge and develop the very advanced
Selectron tube within a few months. The Selectron promised to be a fast
memoiy that would maximize the potentials of electronic speed and
parallel data-transmission and processing.

\(U) To many in the computer field, however, von Neumann seemed too far
ahead of the technology. He also appeared to be naive about how much of
the complexity of his proposed machine could be mastered by his handful
of engineers. His critics thought the EDVAC group was taking a more
sensible course: creating a minimal and reliable computer that had a
possibility of being completed on time.

\(U) Given the ambitious nature of von Neumann\'s computer, Pendergrass
and Campaigne sensed that it was not going to be easy to persuade \"G\"
that scarce resources should be devoted to a machine that was not yet
fully designed, let alone built. No one, in fact, could

TOP SEGnETOOOM!NT/;n,EL UGA, AUG, OAN GBR AND NZU/X1




predict when any of the new computers would be completed.

\(U) Despite von Neumann\'s reputation and the accolades that the atomic
energy community was awarding to the IAS design, Pendergrass and
Campaigne knew they would have to prove that \"a\" machine could compete
with al! the specialpurpose devices that were in place at \"G\" as well
as those that were being planned. And they would have to show, without
insulting anyone, that the new computer would be as good as or better
than Goldberg, the perhaps-universal comparator. Pendergrass and
Campaigne were in a situation quite analogous to Hooper\'s in the early
1930s: How could they convince \"operational\" types that scientists had
a better and practical grasp of the future?

PES} Pendergrass got to work during the summer and continued on, with
Howard Campaigne\'s enthusiastic help, through the remainder of the
year. They composed two persuasive technical reports.12

(TS} The first was sent to \"G\'s\" higher-ups in October, the second in
December. A great deal of effort had gone into both reports to ensure
they would convince the cryptanalysts that, like the proposed Sled, the
von Neumann machine would end the horror of having to wait two years
while a requested special machine was constructed.13 The reports did not
refer to any particular experience, but Pendergrass knew that many in
his audience had gone through the frustrations of World War II when
almost all the RAMs (and the Bombes) had arrived too late.

f¥S} In one of the classic statements in the history of computers,
Pendergrass wrote: \"It is not meant that a computer would replace all
the machines in Building \#4, nor is it meant that it could perform all
the problems as fast as the existing special purpose machines. It is
however, the author\'s contention that a computer could do everything
that any analytic machine in Building

\#4 can, and do a good percentage of these problems more rapidly.\"14

(TS) The text of the report reflected both Pendergrass\' orientation and
the nature of mid19408 computers. After explaining the logic of the von
Neumann machine and admitting that it might be some time before any such
computer would be available, he outlined what he thought was to be a
standard programming language, one based on von Neumann\'s \"one
address\" concept.13

\(U) Von Neumann envisioned a machine that would be used for very precise
calculation and little data processing. To speed calculating, it was to
be a pure binary machine. To further improve performance, he had turned
away from the original EDVAC idea of a four-address instruction. He had
come to believe that the most efficient instruction format should
include only one place to get or put data. That would allow, given the
word size of the computer, more precise calculations without additional
hardware.

\(U) He argued that because his machine would be busy with much internal
work, such as multiplication and division, it would be more efficient to
have \"get\" and \"place\" addresses in separate statements. Only if a
computer was to be used for much I/O and little calculation would a
multi-address instruction be reasonable.

\(U) Von Neumann also believed that his machine should have very few
commands. The smaller the number of commands, the less internal
circuitry that would be needed. Following his mandates, his engineers
were able to reduce the number of components in the IAS machine. It had
only two-thirds the number of tubes of the EDVAC. Von Neumann\'s
mathematical focus also meant that he gave little thought to the I/O
problem. What happened within the computer was more important to him
than handling masses of data.





(T9//gf) Pendergrass agreed with all of von Neumann\'s ideas, but in his
reports he suggested that a few additions be made to von Neumann\'s set
of minimal instructions. They were to be ones which, like multiplication
and mod 2 commands, would be needed to meet special cryptanalytic needs.
Especially important to him were those which would speed the analysis of
baudot traffic.

(=fi\$) The politically important parts of the Pendergrass reports were
the sections in which he and Campaigne presented computer programs for
major cryptanalytic attacks. Demonstrating how the machine would perform
the attacks was critical if\'G\" was to be persuaded to invest in a
computer. Of course, the reports reflected an implicit faith that
programming would be much, much less of a problem than building a
specialpurpose machine. No mention was made of how long it took to write
the programs.

(TS//SI) The first report included software programs for a Generalized
Copperhead problem, a Four-Wheel Enigma Grenade Problem, and a Hagelin
attack. The December report was intended to impress any holdouts. It
contained programs to imitate two of the grand achievements of World War
I, the Duenna and the Mercury. Asa concluding argument, the report
showed how to end the great crypto-disappointments of the war years.
There was a program that could imitate a cipher wheel. It showed that a
general-purpose computer might act as an electronic Super Bombe.16

\(U) Buy a Computer, Now

(£} The reports made their point, at least with farsighted men like
Joseph Wenger. He took action even before the Pendergrass-Campaigne
report of December was completed. To reinforce Pendergrass\' arguments,
he immediately arranged for ERA\'s John Howard to conduct a computer
feasibility study and assigned Pendergrass to continue to survey the
computer field.

\(U) Pendergrass did not waste time. In November he informed \"G\" that
many military and some civilian agencies were very interested in digital
computers and that projects at the National Bureau of Standards and RCA
(with the IAS) stood a good chance of producing machines by 1948. The
IAS-RCA project, he thought, had the best design and best chance of
success.17

\(U) After attending another major computer conclave at Harvard in
January, Pendergrass forwarded a new survey of America\'s and Britain\'s
computer ambitions. He cited the emergence of more computer projects,
most of which were supported by government agencies. The navy\'s Bureau
of Ordnance and the ONR, he showed, had already established quite a
foothold, as had Army Ordnance. Even the Census Bureau had become
involved.18 Among the six active projects19 (the one under John V.
Atanasoff had just been cancelled by the Naval Ordnance Laboratoiy), the
IAS computer, Pendergrass reported, continued to be the best option. It
remained much closer to completion than the proposed Whirlwind at MIT,
and it was more suited to cryptanalytic work than the upcoming
UNIVACortheEDVAC.

\(U) The only nonpositive things that Pendergrass had to say about the
Princeton efforts were that he had discovered that RCA and Princeton did
not have a formal agreement binding the corporation to build a computer
and that its valuable Selectron was still in the \"uncertain\" category.
Neither seemed critical to Pendergrass, however. He expected a working
IAS machine by mid-1948. He assured \"G\" that if the Selectron were not
perfected, an electrostatic memory, such as the one proposed byMFPs Jay
Forrester, would serve as a fully acceptable substitute.

fS-) Pendergrass\' surveys were read by Howard Campaigne, then sent to
Joseph Wenger. Wenger trusted Pendergrass, and he believed that OP-20-G
should gain a foothold in computers before one of the other branches of
the navy





established a monopoly. Without waiting for John Howard and C. B,
Tompkins to submit their ERA report (it arrived in February 1947),
Wenger made a commitment to acquire a von Neumann type of computer. \*°

(Tg//8f) Even before a contract was let, plans were laid to use the new
machine on major operational problems.21 \"G\" even put aside the idea
of building an electronic Super Bombe, at least until the potentials of
the new universal computer were explored.

\(U) In January Wenger was so enthusiastic that he ordered his men to
establish project \"Atlas,\" although he did not yet have the funds to
design and acquire a machine. az The name \"Atlas\" was picked because a
comic strip used it as a name for a \"mental giant,\" but a reference to
raw courage would have been as appropriate. Wenger still had to gain
formal approval for the \"G\" computer.

(•S\^As Wenger struggled to find the money he needed, additional
crypto-studies reinforced the initial enthusiasm, and went beyond it,
perhaps raising expectation a bit too high: This opens tremendous
possibilities in the field of clinical attack by speeding this attack up
to the point where large volumes of traffic may be so processed. With
sufficient skill in preparing the logical control, it seems possible
that the machine may be made to perform any cryptanalytic operation now
done by hand, which does not require intuition.\"23

(■S} Wenger did everything he could to make sure the \"G\" computer
proposal would be funded. He had Pendergrass assigned as a !iais3n to
the Office of Naval Research. It was exploring computers and was
intensely committed to furthering applied mathematics. With Pendergrass
in touch with ONR\'s experts, they would be unlikely to block the \"G\"
request on technical grounds. Other mathematicians in the agency were
sent to important computer seminars: Eachus,

Campaigne, Blois, Tordella, and others met with the \"greats\" of
computer history, such as Alan Turing and M. V. Wilkes.

dSfr The contacts and investigations soon started to pay off. \"G\" was
gaining a reputation as one of \"the\" centers of computer expertise.
Other development projects, such as Whirlwind at MIT, gladly shared
design information.

\(U) At least in terms of computer architecture, \"G\" was well
integrated with high science. \"G\" became committed to the atomic
scientists\' favored way of sending data within the machine: all the
bits at one time in parallel, rather than one bit at a time (serial
mode) as in the EDVAC. As important, \"G\" wanted Atlas to have a single
memory, one to hold both data and instructions. That was in contrast to
some architecture, such as those of Howard Aiken at Harvard, who thought
separate memories, concurrent processing, and dozens of registers made
for a more powerful computer.24 Without any hesitation, \"G\" favored a
pure binary system for its computer. The idea that became embodied in
the UNIVAC, that some decimal representation was more efficient was
rejected.

\(U) While his research crew defined Atlas, Wenger worked on the politics
of acquisition. He convinced the CNO of the need for Atlas, gained an
extremely high priority rating for it,25 and then sidestepped some
serious objections from the Bureau of Ships.

\(U) In response to hints there were already enough navy computer efforts
and that long term research should be left toothers, Wenger informed the
bureau that \"G\" needed to acquire a \"special analytical machine.\"
The word \"special\" gave OP-20-G the opening it needed to avoid a
worst-case situation in which it would be forced to wait for and accept
a machine it might not want. It also gave \"G\" the chance to play a
positive role in the emergence of the computer industry.26





EO 3.3(h)(2) P.L. 86-36

\(U) Well before authorization had been granted, \"G\" began a more
detailed design and made evaluations of possible computer manufacturers.
With all the other government agencies sponsoring research in the field
and with the interest shown by several private companies, \"G\'s\"
experts did not anticipate that a large investment would be required for
the design or for the hardware. \"G\" still thought RCA would enter the
market. The National Bureau of Standards also seemed ready to build a
computer. Wenger expected to have Atlas at the Nebraska Avenue complex
in approximately two years.27

\(U) Whatever the options, Wenger wanted quick action. Even though a
\"special\" machine had been approved and although Monogram funds were
available, there was always the chance that the White House might decide
that computers were a luxury. Even the \$100,000 to \$300,000 for the
machine might be seen as too much for a peacetime intelligence agency.28

\(U) Laying out the general specifications for Atlas was relatively
painless. Pendergrass had done his technical homework, and his
recommendations were only refined, not changed. Beginning in March 1947,
when \"G\" decided to take more responsibility for designing its Atlas,
Campaigne, Eachus, Pendergrass and many others at \"G\" began to meet to
detail the functional characteristics of their newest \"analytical
machine.\" They even began to write programs. The enthusiasm was so
great that many worked nights and weekends on their problems.29

■{S} \"G\" was to have a von Neumann computer, not asouped-up version of
its older devices. Suggestions that Pendergrass\' original sketches be
altered by adding special-purpose attachments were adamantly rejected,
as were those recommendations that the machine have control switches and
plugboards. Software, driving elemental circuits, was to be the only
control mech

{S}- But the number of commands built into the machine was to be
expanded beyond von Neumann\'s original list, and Pendergrass\' early
recommendations. By 1947 close to forty commands were in the design. The
expansion was aimed at easing cryptanalytic processing, as had been the
alteration in the fundamental word size in the machine to six digits.
That would allow letters as well as numbers to be analyzed.

(9} The additional commands were at the fundamental level of the
machine. There were \\no suggestions that complex sequences to imitate
entire processes be wired into Atlas. A series of multiplication
commands and a divide instruction were included, however, as were shift
commands and noncarry arithmetic capabilities\* Shifts were especially
useful when rotor or wheel stepping was required.

anism

30

Also, there were hopes that a random number generator could be devised.

\(U) Campaigne, Eachus, and the others on the design team had bright
hopes for Atlas. But there were limits to the aspirations. They accepted
the fate that plagued the first computer generation: They did not
attempt to write a compiler or a high-level language for the machine.
The only treat the \"G\" group gave programmers was the luxury of
writing in octal rather than binary notation. That provided some relief,
but it did not allow a programmer to avoid specifying the location of
memory addresses in \"absolute\" terms. There was no software to
automatically keep track of where instructions or variables were
located.

\(U) Like the TAS computer, Atlas was to be centered about what the
Princeton group considered \"the\" solution to the memory problem, the
RCA Selectron tube. It would allow an electronicspeed mass memory,
something needed to meet the potential of parallel data transmission and
processing. Hopefully, the Selectrons would support a large memory. In
1990s terms, Atlas was to have 64K. In terms of the longer word size of
the

TOP GEOnETV/GOMINTy/nCL UGA, AUG, OAN GBR AND NZU/X1



Atlas, that was equal to 16,384 \"cells.\" That was orders greater than
what was planned for EDVAC.3\'

\(U) The Selectron was under development at RCA\'s research laboratory.
Rachman\'s tube promised to be much more powerful than the other types
of binary electrostatic storage devices that were under development. And
it was expected momentarily. Although some at OP-20-G had treated many
of Rachman\'s ideas as more than fanciful, because of his advanced work
during the war, he had become an ally of von Neumann, and his work
demanded respect.32

\(U) The Selectron was a complex device, but it had a great advantage; it
was small and fast. Its size was one of its great attractions because
other high-speed memories of the period, such as delay lines or the
Wilkes electrostatic tube,33 took a great amount of space.
Unfortunately, the Selectron proved to be too complex.

\(U) It was based upon the principle that \"an insulated
secondary-electron emitter can be made to \'float\' at either of two
stable positions\...\" Deceptively simple, the principle demanded much
delicate hardware. Inside the three-byseven-inch tubes was a dielectric
target that was divided up by sixty-four metal bars and sixty-five
circular metal rings. They created 4,096 \"cells\" that were the storage
areas. When the four walls of a cell were all more positive than some
particular voltage, a \"bit\" was registered.

\(U) To von Neumann\'s and \"G\'s\" great disappointment, all that was
too much, even for the great Jan Rachman.34 By spring 1947 RCA had to
admit that it might be some time before the Selectron was ready. That
led to some technological soul searching in Princeton and Washington.
The IAS put more effort into a television-like electrostatic memory and
even explored the possibility of ultra-high-speed secondary memory based
on magnetic wire wound on bicycle wheel drives.

\(U) The news about the Selectron was only one indication that the
computer revolution was going to take much longer than had been thought.
RCA began to make it clear that it was pulling back from its hints of
becoming a manufacturer, the National Bureau of Standards program had
slowed to a crawl, and the probability that the exENIAC team, Eckert and
Mauchly, could deliver their promised computer to the Census Bureau in
time for the 1950 census sank to near zero.

\(U) By spring 1947 Atlas was on its own. If \"G\" were to have its
computer, it would have to take even more responsibility, perhaps even
for a very expensive failure. And it would have to make a critical
technological choice.

\(U) Little Thanks for Tliat Memory

\(U) In April 1947, after learning about the faltering industrial
commitments and the Selectron\'s possible stillbirth, \"G\" made two
very significant decisions. The first was to continue with the project
and the acquisition of a computer despite the absence of an \"industry\"
or even a university that seemed willing to build computers. The second
decision was perhaps more dramatic.35

(T0//3I) When it was learned that the Selectron would not be available,
there was a critical meeting at \"G\'s\" Nebraska Avenue headquarters.
Some of those in attendance thought that without the high-speed memory
it would be senseless to continue more than very general design work.
What use would Atlas\' electronic circuits be if the memory was a slow
tape or similar device? Even looking for a manufacturer for Atlas did
not make sense to them. There were a few suggestions that the entire
project be put on hold.

(TC//9F) Howard Campaigne, perhaps worried that such a decision would
end chances of funding, put up a stubborn fight. He won half his battle:
The work was not canceled. But his victory seemed to open the door to
some dangerous





possibilities. His recommendation to go with what had always been the
\"fall back\" memory for Atlas and Goldberg,36 a magnetic drum, stood
the chance of making Atlas and \"G\" look rather foolish. It could make
Atlas very slow and perhaps very dumb.

£Rj//flI) Drums were much faster than tapes or cards, but they delivered
information at a rate of i/400th or less of delay lines. Some estimates
of the period gave the Selectron and electrostatic memories a 1,000-fold
advantage.37 If microfilm could have been made to be \"rewritable,\" it
could also have made a drum look antiquated. Seventymillimeter microfilm
held 12,000 bits per inch; drums had a density of from 100 to 200
bits.38

GBS-) Although \"G\'s\" RAM group realized that such a memory would slow
the proposed machine manyfold, by a close vote its members decided that
a drum would be acceptable. It seemed a much better choice than
postponing the project and being left dependent on the whims of an
almost nonexistent computer industry.

-£BS} Campaigne and his associates realized they were taking a chance.
There were hosts of mechanical as well as magnetic-electronic challenges
to overcome. Whether the \"drums\" were long bars or three-foot
\"wheels\" covered with magnetic tape or sprayed with a magnetic
coating, the problems of milling, sensing heads, and drive motors
remained unsolved. Even ERA with a head start on drum construction
because of its connection to the earlier RAM projects, did not have a
finished and sure technology in hand. \^

(=F8\> \"G\" decided to take the risk. While the IAS group waited for
the Selectron\'s development or the appearance of another electrostatic
memory, \"G\" started to work on revised designs for a drum machine. It
also began a search for someone to build the newly defined Atlas.40

CfS) No serious consideration seems to have been given to having, as
would many atomic ener

gy research groups, a university take charge of final design and
manufacture. And \"G\" did not spend much time investigating the few
companies that seemed willing to build computers. Thus, soon after the
critical April 1947 meeting, ERA was chosen even though \"G\" knew how
busy the young firm was with its first contracts.

\(8) There was some worry that Atlas might be a bit too much for the new
company and that some emerging problems with magnetic drums might not be
conquered. 41 But in August 1947 ERA was given a design contract. And it
was informed that \"G\" wanted a machine soon. ERA was not to wait for
the results of the several research projects OP-20-G and the SIS were
sponsoring to develop multifunction and ultrahigh-speed tubes and new
circuits. And there was no thought of delaying Atlas just because there
were not yet any high-speed printers suitable for an electronic
computer.42

\(325) There were a growing number of reasons why \"G\" wanted ERA to
quickly prove the worth of a universal machine for cryptanalysis. Just
as ERA was put to work on the final designs, the Sled project with its
special architecture was being launched with much support from the
Bureau of Ships. In addition to having some competition, Atlas had to
face another possible trauma; there were well-grounded rumors that the
Monogram budget was to be cut severely so.41

fFS} With a great deal of help from \"G\'s\" research group in
Washington, ERA was able to develop an acceptable design within a few
months. As requested, it matched the von Neumann concepts and was aimed
at avoiding manufacturing problems. Some rather useful ideas were
sacrificed to the needs of the production schedule. A second processor,
which would check results, was not included, and the suggestion to
develop a partitioned memoiy was dropped. Having as many as eight active
\"accumulators\" was also regarded as too much of a luxury.




TOP WPlHfninimmi-i nr. ..,,» m{ \^ flMp M7U/ri

fES} In early spring 1948, in return for promises to use as much
standard equipment as possible, ERA was awarded a construction contract.
There was a caveat, however. ERA was more than encouraged to build Adas
in a way that would allow the substitution of electrostatic (Selectron)
storage if and when it became available.

(T0//0I) ERA and \"G° were in a hurry. Adas was given an AA priority,
ERA borrowed much from MITs Whirlwind project, and ERA gave Adas as much
attention as possible even when it had to rush to complete some
special-purpose machines to attack Russian targets.44

(S\> While the engineers in St. Paul were working on Atlas, the
mathematicians-turned-programmers in Washington built their own computer
to prepare for Adas\' arrival. They wanted programs ready to help prove
their electronic computer\'s operational value as soon as it was
delivered. Constructed within four months out of relays and a small
magnetic drum developed by ERA their Abel computer was a logical clone
of

Adas. It gave \"G\" more than a year\'s head start in training
programmers and in writing some operational programs. Its drum was not
large enough to perform all of Adas\' chores, and its relays were
hundreds of times slower than ERA\'s circuits, but it came to be almost
a \"pet\" of the research group \"

45

::: {style="width: 53.46922775382203%;"}
:::

P Atlas 1

(•G-) Meanwhile, despite the growing pressures on ERA, it was able to
work something of a computer miracle: Adas was delivered to the navy in
early December 1950, fairly close to the anticipated delivery date. It
had taken ERA less than two years to construct the machine, perhaps
because so much time had been spent preparing for its production stage
and because of ERA\'s experience building special-purpose machines, such
as Goldberg. In fact, Adas was the thirteenth project for \"G.\"46

(€T Most of the design goals were accomplished. That made Atlas one of
the very first operational computers in the world. ERA also achieved
another sort of computer first: Adas worked and worked well for ; a
decade after it was sent to Washington. A very efficient testing and
maintenance schedule allowed replacement of tubes before they caused an
unexpected failure. That contributed to an almost unheard of 90 percent
\"up-time\" (availability), which made ERA very proud and very anxious
to transfer its new computer skills to the commercial marketplace.47 It
was also proud that it could have built one of the most powerful of all
the early computers using only 2,700 tubes and that its drum performed
reliably-48 Asa result, ERA and its follow




10\^ afcUKbl/ZlUMINlimfcL U&A, AU3, CAM ODR AMD HZU/X1

lEO 3.3(h)(2) P.L. 86-36

on companies became leaders in magnetic drum technology and gained a
reputation as supercomputer builders.

\(U) Saving a Reputation through Logic

PR8} But all the original Atlas goals were not attained. The machine had
cost perhaps three times the early postwar estimate; its delivery price
was just short of \$1,000,000. 49 More importantly, the drum held less
than one-third the amount of information that had been hoped for in
1947. But ERA was able to rotate it at an extremely high speed. Partly
by reducing its size from the dimensions of earlier drums (three feet in
diameter) to twenty-five inches long and eight inches in diameter,
Atlas\' drum was ten times as fast as the one installed on Goldberg.
\"\" The increased speed helped, but it did not solve the memory access
problem. The 1950 Adas began its life as a very slow machine because the
program, as well as data, had to be read from the drum. There did not
seem to be a viable technical save. Replacing the drum with the still
expensive and irritable electrostatic or delay-line memories seemed
impractical.

-ffS) The programmers atOP-20-G were charged with finding the best
solution they could. Perhaps to everyone\'s surprise, they came up with
an answer that made Adas competitive with other computers of the time.

i\^T The solution they devised was called \"interlacing.\" Combined with
very careful programming, it increased Adas\' speed by a factor of more
than 300. That meant that the drum-based Adas became approximately
two-thirds as fast as a similar machine using the new magnetic core
memory of the mid-1950s. In fact, Adas came close to being a match for
the IAS machine.5\*The increase in Atlas\' speed came at a high cost to
the early programmers, however.

(S\^The trick they had to pull off was to place instructions around the
drum in such an order

that rotation time until the next expected instruction was minimized. At
first, \\ a plugboard was used to accomplish the necessary scrambling of
once-sequential locations. By 1951 an automatic \"dial\" system was
installed that eliminated the need to replug a board for each program.
Although the relocation of instructions was made automatic, programming
was; not. To utilize the \"interlaced\" instruction, programs had to be
drafted on large sheets ofp4per. The two-bythree-foot sheets allowed the
programmers to keep track of where the instructions were located and
allowed them to perform jtiming miracles so that the call for the
instruction came when the drum was in the correct positions.52

(T8\^-Despite the near agony of Adas programming, a wide range of
statistical attacks was run on the machine. It proved Pendergrass\'
point about flexibility although writing Adas\' programs, took much,
much longer than had been imagined by him in 1946. Such fondly
remembered programs as Bootstraps for the identification of nonrandom
distributiqhs (roughness testing) and I \*\~

analysis aids took

enormous human effort.53

\(U) The new programmers in Washington could not find any way to
compensate for another of Atlas\' failings, however. Adas could not be
coaxed into becoming a data processing computer. Its input-output
capabilities were too limited. It brought data to its drum through a
photoelectric papertape reader; an Electromatic typewriter and a tape
punch handled its output. T\^eTwere no pathways for punch card machines
nor for the just emerging magnetic tape drives.

(\*ft\^ A severe limitation with many ramifications was Adas\' inability
to put the input tapereader under program control. All the reader could
do was load the drum. The paper tapes could not be used as a dynamic
source of data.54

fS4 Adas\' sparse I/O was a result of conscious design judgments, ones
which mixed technologi

top oconrn/ooMiNT/mBL uoa, auo» can obr amd nzu/xi




cal possibilities with operational needs and with a strong dose of
\"GM\'s\" goal of fulfilling Wenger\'s dream of \"mathematical\"
cryptanalysis.

(S\> When Atlas was being designed, the only new large-scale secondary
memory media that seemed to have input potential was magnetic tape. But
tape systems with the possibility of holding massive amounts of
information remained in the development stage and were proving very
stubborn. To wait for their maturation would have delayed Atlas\'
construction; to attempt to anticipate what circuitry Adas needed to
hook up to future systems would have been foolish.

4\$) Attaching Atlas to an IBM card reader might have seemed attractive
atone point, but there may have been questions about using that
company\'s equipment in a competitor\'s system.

tS\^In any case, \"G\" had decided by 1948 that energies would goto
increasing Atlas\' internal processing power by adding additional
\"instruction\" circuits. The expansion of the number of hardwired
instructions was intended to encourage the use of
Kmathematical\"cryptanalysis. The many binary multiplication and
shifting instructions and the divide circuitry made Adas more expensive
and harder to manufacture, but they speeded statistical testing by many
factors.

(S)-Those features seemed so attractive that despite the severe I/O
limitations, a second Adas was ordered some six months before the first
was shipped from St. Paul. Because the initial model absorbed the
development cost, this Adas was priced at one-third of the original. At
the same time, a new design cycle was begun. The Adas II, which in its
civilian guise was called the 1103, was the machine that anchored the
ERA group\'s computer building reputation, although its original price
was \$1,250,000.w

QtS//0f) For a time, however, it was thought that Adas III would be a
data processor as well as

a \"number cruncher.\" But Adas II could not overcome the earlier I/O
limitations. When it was being designed, the Raytheon Company announced
it was perfecting tape drives. ERA\'s engineers built a
program-controlled I/O feature into the machine only to discover serious
technical difficulties with the Raytheon magnetic tape systems. Despite
a last-minute effort, eleven were delivered without a tape capability.56
But its internal processing powers were much enhanced. Some
electrostatic storage was added, the drum was improved, a two-address
logic was introduced, the word size was increased, and several very
useful basic instructions were added.

\(U) All in all, \"G\" thought that its sometimes frustrating computer
adventure had been worthwhile. The agency\'s advocates for
general-purpose machines had made their point, and the work on Adas
helped to establish ERA as a computer company. The Adas designs and
designers would play an important part in the history of automation of
communications intelligence.

\(U) The relatively happy ending of the Adas project was not quite
matched in the army\'s attempts to establish its place in the computer
world.

\(U) The Army\'s Problem

4G) The SIS lost many of its engineers after the war, and it was unable
to create its own ERA. In response, it planned to do some machine design
in-house, go to contractors for details and components, and, when
necessary, assemble its secret special-purpose devices itself. That
seemed quite efficient, but the SIS was unable to follow that approach
when it began its quest for its first general-purpose computer, a
machine that took its name from another newspaper cartoon character,
\"Abner.\" Although some have claimed the name was chosen because the
modern computer without a program is a dumb machine, the selection of
the name in 1949 may have been inspired by the nature of the search for
a design and a


I UP &ECRETOCOMIHT\<mEL USA, AU3, OAN ODR AMD NZU/XI



manufacturer. The army\'s codebreakers had gone through a bizarre and
agonizing odyssey during the previous three years. The experience was
almost cosmic.57

fj9) In 1945 there was a significant reduction in force at the SIS. But
Solomon Kullback and Leo Rosen were able to retain enough personnel and
funds to continue the old \"F\" branch - one with a fresh bureaucratic
name and expanded powers.58 One of their first and most important
decisions was to appoint one of their young proteges to head a new
subsection. In January 1946 Samuel S. Snyder, who later became a major
figure in the computer and information world, was asked to survey the
wartime computer developments and then to turn his new RAM research
group into a dynamic force. The group was to keep the agency informed
about all the computer developments in the world and to act as an
advocate for further automation within the agency.

QB) Snyder and his coworkers, Mary Roseboro and William May, began by
gathering and rewriting all the documentation that remained on the World
War II machines at SIS. Soon they decided to expand the survey to
include the devices OP

::: {style="width: 36.94117647058823%;"}
:::

20-G had obtained. That turned their project into creating what became
the irreplaceable \"Machine Aids to Cryptanalysis\" series.59

■tfif Snyder did more than follow in-house developments. By mid-1947 he
had visited the National Bureau of Standards and had made some contacts
with those in academia and the commercial sector that had interests in
computer development. But he got somewhat of a late start at his
attempts to bring a computer to the agency.

(S//ST) The SIS was at least a year or two behind OP-20-G\'s computer
work. One reason was that someone like Snyder had not been selected to
attend the Philadelphia computer symposium in mid-1946 that had so
impressed Pendergrass. Instead, Kullback had sent a SIS engineer who had
little or no mathematical or cryptanalytic experience. The man was not
impressed with what he heard and did not report back to the SIS that a
great technological and cryptanalytic opportunity had appeared.
According to Snyder, the man did not even submit a report on the ENLAC
and EDVAC designs.60

(S//SI) Fortunately for the agency, Sam Snyder encountered Pendergrass\'
report. Inspired, he began contacting others who were developing what
later became known as \"computer science.\" Snyder became somewhat of a
computer \"trekkie.\" He attended all the meetings, such as the famous
one at the Aberdeen Proving Grounds, of the just forming Eastern
Association for Computing Machinery.61 He learned of the vast data
processing center at the Prudential Insurance Company (some 700 IBM
machines) and the plans of one of its aggressive young executives to
make the Prudential a center for electronic computer development and
applications. That contact with E. C. Berkeley reinforced Snyder\'s
rather philosophical view of the coming computer revolution. Berkeley
was one of the first \"futurists\" in the computer field.62

\(U) Samuel S. Snyder

IUH fc\>blKbl»UJIVIINi;mEL U&A, AUS, LAN QBE AND NZU/XI




TS/7\^JThere was a much more practical side to Snyder\'s trips around
the East Coast. By at least mid-1947 the SIS decided that it would not
let OP-20-G be the only one with an electronic general-purpose computer.
Snyder was sent to all the companies and academic institutions that had
indicated they were going to take the risk of building a computer. The
only centers Snyder did not seem to visit were ERA, Harvard, and Western
Electric. He skipped ERA because he already knew about its computer
design and, perhaps, because from the beginning, the SIS did not want
just a clone of the navy\'s computer. Nor did it want to become
dependent on the navy\'s captive corporation.\" He bypassed Harvard,
where Howard Aiken continued to build ordnance computers, because the
unique Harvard architecture did not seem right for cryptanalytic work.
The Western Electric postwar devices also seemed to be a bit \"old\" in
terms of design and hardware.

(0//0I) Snyder\'s trips were exciting; he was becoming a pioneer. He was
able to see all that the fledgling UNIVAC group in Philadelphia was
doing. He even spent time with Grace Hopper, who was becoming a legend
in the computer world for her contributions to programming. While in
Philadelphia, he also made contact with the EDVAC team. Then he headed
for Princeton and the Institute for Advanced Study where Julian Bigelow
was leading the group that was slowly making John von Neumann\'s concept
turn into hardware. The Institute and Bigelow were impressive, but
Snyder continued his search. Soon he was in Boston, where he found what
he thought was the most promising of all the computer projects in the
country. It was the one within Vannevar Bush\'s old company, Raytheon.
Bush, however, had nothing to do with the project. In fact, many of its
bright engineers had come out of the World War II computer projects run
by Howard Aiken at Harvard.

\(U) Snyder thought that Raytheon\'s R. M. Bloch, R. V. D. Campbell, and
M. Ellis were doing the most exciting work in the country and were

the most likely to be able to construct the type of computer the SIS
needed.63 In addition to the design of its computer, Raytheon was
attractive because it was the only large corporation in the country
willing to subsidize computer development.

\(U) The company was in a unique position. Raytheon had gone from a
moderate size firm in the 1930s to become a major defense contractor
during World War II. It was aggressively seeking new products and
markets that would allow it to keep its position in the peacetime
economy. That was in contrast, for example, to IBM, which was unwilling
to endanger its major product lines by leaping into computers.

(T8//8i) The small firms that were showing interest in computers were
not viable alternatives for Snyder. Investing in them posed a risk for
any purchaser. Even the one with the best reputation was showing signs
that it was overreaching itself. UNWAC\'s Eckert and Mauchly wanted the
SIS\'s work, but could not commit to building a machine that would suit
the needs of cryptanalysis within a reasonable time. In addition, there
may already have been security problems at the company.64

(S3 That left Raytheon as almost the only option for the SIS. Then the
proposed Raytheon machine received more acclaim. While Sam Snyder was
making the rounds of the computer centers, his research group had been
examining the designs of all the proposed computers and found that
Raytheon\'s was to be a data processor, at least much more so than Atlas
or any of the von Neumann machines, because it was a fouraddress device.
In addition, although it was a serial processor, its speed would be more
than adequate because it was to have a large and fast memory built of
Selectrons. Although ERA had concluded that the Selectron might never
appear and turned to the drums, the SIS bet that it would soon emerge
from RCA\'s research laboratory.





-fS) Talks were begun with Raytheon\'s management, and by fall 1947 the
SIS group thought an advanced computer was about to be built for them.
The early plans included more than just a fast memory. Raytheon promised
to make its computer more of a data processor than any other by
developing revolutionary magnetic tape and wire systems. They were to
provide high-speed bulk input, and there were even hopes of devising
high-speed output mechanisms. Perhaps as important, the SIS thought that
Raytheon might deliver a machine before Atlas could be sent to
Washington.

\^ It wasn\'t too long before those hopes were dashed. Raytheon let the
SIS know that because it had obtained a contract for a computer from
another navy agency (through the NBS), it would beat least three years
before a SIS computer could be completed. Although the company offered
an attractive price, \$350,000, and indicated it would be able to
provide the SIS with a machine that included their very promising
plastic tape systems, they declared they would provide it on their
schedule.

-(SHThe SIS group hesitated before accepting the new offer, thinking
that three years was much too long to wait. They had been very busy
writing their own version of the Pendergrass report and had already
written programs for the type of machine they desired. Those investments
seemed too much to waste. But there was no alternative to Raytheon.

£ES} When the SIS managers returned to the company, they were somewhat
resigned to a long wait, although they planned to bargain over delivery
schedules. As they started the negotiations, they received a shock. The
company had reworked its estimate of the cost of a computer that met
Snyder\'s needs. Raytheon now wanted so much more that the SIS turned
the offer down without further bargaining.65

\(U) Stratton\'s Dream Revisited

\(U) In near desperation, Snyder went to the National Bureau of
Standards. Standards had visions of becoming what Stratton had desired a
generation before: the center for computer development in the nation.
John Hamilton Curtiss, an applied mathematician with a Harvard degree
and wartime navy experience, had been hired by the new crusading leader
of the NBS, E. U. Condon, to accomplish that. By 1947 Condon had funds
for computer development and was on the way to becoming an intermediary
for all government agencies\' computer purchases. With a group of
energetic engineers and mathematicians, the NBS guided, for example,
developments atUNIVAC and Raytheon. It was doing much more. It was
encouraging and coordinating the work of many contractors who were
developing computer components, and it was making suggestions to
builders to improve computer architecture.66

\(U) But contact with the NBS did not lead to any immediate relief for
Snyder. The best the NBS said it could do was to allow Snyder\'s group
to attend the computer lectures it was conducting and to provide leads
to new companies that might be willing to build a computer.

\(U) It was mid-1948 and the SIS still did not have a final design or a
contractor.

(6} The SIS went in circles for a time, then came back to an earlier
contact, the Reeves Instrument Corporation, a New York firm that was a
leader in the analog computer business. It had just completed a very
useful and pathbreaking electronic differential analyzer, the REAC. It
had also gained some digital experience by helping the University of
Pennsylvania with its computer projects. More importantly, it had let it
be known that it was going into the digital computer business. To do so
it had hired one of the most unusual men in the early computer business,

top Gr.Gnr.T//ooMiNT//rcr.L uoa, auo, can odr and nzu/xi




Samuel Lubkin, to supervise the design and construction of its proposed
REVAC.

c\$) Lubkin was an alumnus of the important University of Pennsylvania
projects, and he wanted to build his own improved version of an EDVAC.
His past experience and the preliminary design of the Reeves machine
convinced the SIS\'s team to support Lubkin\'s design although he
planned to use delay-line rather than faster Selectron memory.
Abandoning the Selectron was difficult, but there was an attractive
trade-off: Reeves was proposing to build its advanced version of the
EDVAC within one year for a bargain price of \$150,000. 68 Although the
Reeves machine would be serial and clock-based, it was to use four
addresses; most importantly, it would beat Arlington Hall before the end
of the decade.69

GS) Serious talks were begun with Reeves in early summer 1948 and Snyder
and his team felt vindicated.

OES) Then chaos took hold again. Just as negotiations were begun, Reeves
announced it was not going to branch out into digital computers

70

tS) Lubkin immediately left the company. At first Snyder thought that
all was not lost. There seemed a chance that Lubkin could become an SIS
employee. At least the design for his machine could be finished. Talks
were held: then Lubkin decided he wanted to found his own computer
company. For a moment it appeared that the SIS might have its own
version of ERA That was a short-lived dream. Lubkin could not raise the
necessary financing. Lubkin gave up and took a government job, but not
with the SIS. He went with the National Bureau of Standards.

\(U) There was no one left to build \"Abner.\" For the SIS there was no
American computer industry. Then there were a few moments of relief when
the NBS gave some indications that it might

arrange for a computer for the agency. As happened so many times before,
the hopes were defeated. The contractors the NBS was depending upon for
the computers to be used at its important applied mathematics centers
could not meet their schedules. They got so far behind that the NBS
decided to build a machine for itself. That eliminated any chance that
the SIS could get a machine within the near future. The NBS would be too
busy arranging for its \"interim\" computers. Its work force had to
concentrate on a machine to save the NBS\'s numerical centers, and its
needs would keep available subcontractors busy.71

{\$) Swallowing a great deal of pride, the SIS made another brief
attempt to get Raytheon to reconsider. No deal could be struck. Then the
SIS decided that it had only one alternative, unless it was to give up
on the idea of being one of the first members of the world\'s \"computer
club.\" No matter what the risk, it had to build its own machine. Snyder
reasoned that since the SIS now had an engineering staff of some sixty
men who had already had much electronics experience (as a result of
their work in radar and other military electronics), there was a chance
of success.

\"TC-) But Snyder knew his group required help; it needed some
experienced and skilled computer designers to flesh out the functional
sketches being produced by the SIS engineers, such as Ray Bowman and
Dwight Ashley. Again the SIS went to the National Bureau of Standards.
Since Lubkin was there and since he had already put so much work into
the design ofthe REVAC, it seemed reasonable to expect cooperation and a
detail design within a short time. The NBS was reluctant to take on any
more responsibilities, however. They had their own crisis to deal with.
But after emphasizing that it was too busy to build a machine for the
agency, in early fall 1948 the NBS offered to take on the design task
for \$150,000.72 That seemed a bit too expensive. That was the amount
that Reeves was to have charged for a delivered machine, but the SIS\'s
options were limited. So, even though the NBS




EO 3.3(h)(2) £.!\_. 86-36


was indicating that it was going to provide the SIS only with something
close to a copy of the very simplified delay-line SEAC, it was rushing
to build for itself, the offer was accepted.73

4S1 To prepare for the arrival of the design, a team of engineers was
formed and programming classes were begun. Snyder felt that his ordeal
was finally over. The project seemed about ready to contribute
operational results; there was great enthusiasm. The new programmers
went beyond their lessons and began to write routines to attack Soon the
mathematicians

\]

at the SIS were swept up in the excitement over the about-to-appear
computer. Dick Liebler and Hugh Gingerich even devised anew class of

attacks

ones that could be done

only on a high-speed digital machine.74

tS} Unfortunately, the plans did not come from the National Bureau of
Standards on schedule. Its crew was so busy with the bureau\'s own
computer problems and those of the contractors it was supervising for
other government agencies, that all Snyder got from them were promises
to hurry. The situation got worse when Lubkin decided that Standards was
not for him. That complicated an already difficult situation because
those who took over his tasks favored a much simpler machine than the
SIS was expecting.75

TSKThere were meetings, but they were disappointing. The NBS was willing
to promise a design for only a very bare bones device. And they could
not guarantee when those plans would be ready for the engineers and
programmers who waited for them at Arlington Hall.

(S//SI) Everyone at the SIS grew more frustrated. The frustration was
compounded by growing ambitions. As the SIS engineers and programmers
gained more experience, they thought of many ways to make \"Abner\" an
effective cryptanalytic device.76 But it would have to be a much more
complex machine than the one proposed by the NBS and a more intricate
one than Atlas. It

was also clear that Abner was going to cost the agency much more than
had been imagined.

\(U) So Much for Simplicity

ITSffSi\^\'With young men like Ray Bowman in the lead, ideas were put
forward to change Abner into something more like a Sled than a simple
EDVAC. He and others showed how basic cryptanalytic functions could be
turned into circuits that, they thought, should become an integral part
of Abner. Some fifteen special \"instructions\" were drawn as circuit
diagrams and were shown to the few men at the NBS who had security
clearances.77Their reaction was not positive; they felt they were being
asked to do much more than was initially agreed upon. And even when a
compromise was suggested, that the special functions such as a
two-message offset instruction be put into a separate box that the SIS
would design and build, agreements could not be reached. Even such a
box, the NBS engineers argued, would demand too many complex circuits in
the main computer.78 There was a stand-off, a quiet one, but it was
clear the two agencies had reached an impasse in late 1949.79

\(U) Another critical decision had to be made. Should Abner be abandoned
at least until the uncontrollable NBS decided to devote serious
attention to it? Or, since the SIS and OP-20-G had been merged into the
new Armed Forces Security Agency, should everyone be required to wait
for the completion of the further advanced Atlas project? It did not
take too long for the administrators to make a courageous decision. They
allowed the Arlington Hall engineers to go ahead and design and build
their own machine.

\(U) That seemed a reasonable decision because so much agency effort had
already gone into Abner and because the computer manufacturers,
including IBM, continued to back away from taking contracts for
machines. And the agency knew that smaller companies, such as
Technitrol, could be counted on for components.





They were already helping with the special-purpose machines the agency
was considering.

\(U) Abner\'s Not Quite Best Friend

f©-The decision to build Abner received an unexpected justification in
mid-1950. During the first months ofthe Korean War, when the American
military was unable to show that it could effectively police the world,
it was at least suspected that the American navy\'s callsigns were
inadequate. New ones had to be generated to protect the fleet and its
messages. There was a critical need to run \"involuntary matrices\" to
ensure randomness. That was a demanding job and one that Solomon
Kullback, the agency\'s research director, had given the highest
priority.

4\$) In summer 1950 a survey was made ofthe possibility of running the
matrices on IBM tabulator equipment. The result was very disappointing.
Then a suggestion was made that perhaps the relay analog ofthe
soon-to-be-delivered Atlas could be used. Some ofthe mathematicians
explored the possibility and then, perhaps prompted by Sam Snyder,
looked at the possibility of using the NBS\'s new SEAC. It was the
interim computer the NBS had decided to build on its own in 1948.
Constructed in two years, it was a bare bones version ofthe EDVAC, but
it worked.

JJ&) Required to estimate whether or not it would be worthwhile to ask
the NBS if SEAC could be used on the callsign problem, the SIS\'s
programmers made pencil and paper calculations ofthe power of various
alternatives.

•&) Their estimates gave the following times for gaining a completed and
satisfactory matrix.80

ias

By Hand By Relay ByArJ

(Drum) 5 hours 4.5 hours 3 minutes

(S\^ The results seemed unambiguous. The electronic machines were
undoubtedly faster

By Seac (Delay) 20 seconds

than hand or relay process, and most importantly, the delay-line
machines, such as SEAC, were orders faster than the ones with drum
memory. That finding was support for Abner\'s cause and for the NBS\'s
SEAC. As a result, Sam Snyder went to the National Bureau of Standards
and gained permission to use the SEAC for the matrix problem.81
Unfortunately, the first hands-on experience with an electronic computer
was very disappointing. If there had not been so much invested in Abner,
the experience with SEAC might have led to abandoning Abner.

-QS) A program for computing the matrices on SEAC was written in some
two months, not an easy task in the early 1950s. Then in September some
SEAC run time was allocated to the agency - but on weekends and nights
and at \$24.00 an hour, not an inconsiderable sum at the time. The
expense had not been foreseen, nor had the SEAC\'s temper. SEAC soon
taught the analysts that there was a vast difference between the
theoretical internal speed of computers and their real operating time.

C&) The first post-midnight session on SEAC took twelve very
discouraging hours. Despite all the care that had been taken, the result
had to be abandoned because of repeated machine errors. A few days later
some 200 matrices were created, but then errors crept in again. After
just two hours of successful runs, it was decided that a checking
program should be written so that all results could be verified.

\^g) The frustrations continued. In midSeptember, SEAC worked only four
out of sixteen hours, and the results that were obtained were put into
question because ofthe quirky behavior ofthe computer.

S&) On September 19 SEAC did more than follow the laws of early computer
technology (to rarely work); it committed a serious political blunder.
The agency had reserved a precious twelve-hour chunk of time, between
noon and


TOP 9EGREWCOMIWT//RCL UQA, AUG, OAN OBR AND NZU/X1


rop msmmasmmns: usa, auo, can odr and imm

midnight, because some official had decided it was appropriate that the
great secret of SEAC and the future Abner be revealed to the SIGINT
community. Some twenty-five people were invited to watch the NBS\'s
machine in action. Sam Snyder was in charge of running SEAC.

\(S) Much to Snyder\'s embarrassment, of the entire twelve hours \"o
hours were productive.\" He was so angry that he wrote in a report, \"In
the future, when trouble with SEAC develops, no more attempts will be
made by personnel of this Section to find the cause of the
difficulty.\"82

\(S) Despite the anger and the problems that continued to be encountered
with SEAC runs, it was decided to keep the matrices that had been
produced.

\(U) Abner by Inertia

f€£.While SEAC was refusing to give its best, the crew at Arlington Hall
got to work building Abner, not telling the NBS exactly what they were

doing. They worked so quickly and quietly that when the NBS
representatives finally appeared at Arlington Hall with some sketches,
they were shown, with much ceremony, the completed SIS design.83

{6} That design had become very ambitious, going far beyond the NBS\'s
SEAC.84 The basic EDVAC approach was maintained, but many special
functions were included. Abner became much more of a crypto-computer
than Atlas.

69\) Three groups of special instructions were built into Abner. The
first made encipher/decipher tasks easier. A programmer could call for
addition without carrying and specify which number base, ranging from
two to greater than thirty-two. Abner could very quickly run key against
text, imitating many of the previous special-purpose machines. The
second group of commands made Abner a more efficient processor of
streams of data, allowing easy transfer of blocks of information and
repetition of a series of instructions until a task was completed. The
third

::: {style="width: 67.26773814190513%;"}
:::

•4\^ Abner

top or.onnv/ooM!NT//m:L uoa, auo, can odr and nzujxi




group contained instructions that made Abner a powerful \"comparator.\"
Using the one Swish instruction, a programmer could tell Abner to85

Pass two variable length streams of five-bit characters from memory to
the control of the analytic unit of the machine;

Compare groups of varied sizes (one to sixtythree characters) for
coincidences;

Store the count in a specified location;

Offset one data stream to prepare it for another round of coincidence
testing.

•fS} As significant for the evolution of the computer, there were
courageous attempts to give Abner what most other computers of the time
did not have, a range of powerful input and output devices. A big gamble
was taken: the new plastic magnetic tapes could be made to function.
Connections for six of the Raytheon drives were installed. A punched
tape reader was attached as well. Not as exciting, but more important
from an operational standpoint, an IBM collator was to be used for card
input and a modified IBM card punch for output.86 There were many
software developments. By the time Abner was completed in April 1952,
the SIS programmers had written a wide range of operational routines.87

\(U) Abner\'s Bad Temper

fjS)-But it was some two years between the time the SIS engineers
decided to detail their own Abner and its start-up as an operational
machine. And its cost climbed to twice the original estimate of
\$300,000. Even then, it was just, as one engineer put it, an
\"experimental model.\"

-(S) And it was almost as temperamental as SEAC. Its special functions
made it a bit too complicated to maintain (it had 1,500 tubes and 25,000
diodes), the PO devices and their interfaces had many troublesome
moments, and the

more than 100 delay lines needed constant finetuning.

88

\"\"(\$)• The limitations of the 1952 Abner were obvious. But its
problems did not cause the SIS to abandon computers. A contract was let
to have the Technitrol company in Philadelphia build a new version. It
arrived in mid-1955, cost approximately \$1,000,000, and like Abner I,
had an operational price tag of almost the same amount.

-6S-) It was known in the 1940s that operators, cooling systems and
repairs would make computers very expensive to maintain. But there was
another cost that was not anticipated: programming. Abner I needed
\$130,000 a year worth of programmer time plus additional amounts for
special projects.89

\"XS//SB Abner had another expense: a clone. In 1950 it was decided that
Abner should have the same kind of relay-circuit cousin that had been
quickly built to train Atlas\'s programmers. When the construction of
\"Baker\" began, no one expected it to take two years to complete, nor
to become the size of a room. Nor did anyone foresee that the relay
version of Abner would be much less reliable than the new electronic
machine. Baker proved so difficult that it never kept its promise to be
an inexpensive training and program-debugging aid to Abner.90

4S) Despite Baker\'s failings, many innovative programs were written for
Abner. They spanned all cryptanalytic attacks as well as data processing
tasks. The list of programs is impressive, especially when it is
realized they were written in an era when programming was something of a
black art. For many years programs had to be written in the o\'s and
l\'s the computer recognized, and even when \"higher\" level languages
appeared, programming and debugging were energy-draining and
emotion-laden exercises.

£KS) Abner was used to \"diarize\" as well as to analyze wired rotor
systems. But perhaps its most





useful program was Stethoscope. Written very early in the history of
programming, it became a classic. Stethoscope very efficiently applied
all the major statistical attacks against cipher text in unknown
systems.91 The routines proved so valuable, and the potentials of
expanding Stethoscope seemed so great, that a very courageous step was
taken by the SIS programmers. They decided to write one of the very
first compilers. Bill Cherry played a key role in the LULU project to
create software that would allow programmers to very easily compose and
correct programs that called many subroutines. With the help of LULU and
its follow-on, Stethoscope became the much more powerful general
cryptanalytic program, Supersteth.

\(U) And Then Came \...

(fS/ySE) It had taken many years and millions of dollars to prove that a
universal computer could be a valuable statistical tool, however. And
there were some critical moments when it seemed that a special
architecture would be the wisest choice for the SIGINT agencies. In
fact, one of the gravest crises in the history of American cryptanalysis
shifted attention to such alternatives and highlighted the weaknesses of
the new generalpurpose computers. \"Black Friday\" of 1948 saw a return
to a faith in special-purpose devices; they seemed the only way to
overcome Soviet systems that were making the Enigma and even Tunny look
simple. But \"Black Friday\" also showed how far the computer had to go
before it could replace the old reliable data processors, the
tabulators.

Notes

i.(U) NSA, OP-20-G, J.T. Pendergrass, \"Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed
Digital Computing Machines,\" 1946. NSA, Samuel S. Snyder \"Influence of
United States Cryptologic Organizations on the Digital Computer
Industry,\" dates the beginning of Goldberg to 1947 perhaps on the basis
of the contract for the machine rather than on the date of start of the
explorations for a universal scanning machine.

2\. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, July 1994, On Rachman,
(T0//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, and CCH Computer History Box, OP-20-G
\"War Diary Reports: March 1,1943 - May 31,1948,\" August 1945.

3\. (U) Anthony Ralston (ed.), Encyclopedia of Computer Science (New
York: Van Norstrand Reinhold, 1976), 482, 1459.

4-fe)-NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K, Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979,1-2.

5\. (U) On the postwar Selector project and its tie to Bush and \"G\'s\"
ERA, see Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy: Vannevar Bush, Ultra, and
the Other Memex (Metuchen, N. J.: The Scarecrow Press, 1994.) On Bush
and Eisenhower, see Thomas Johnson, American Cryptology during the Cold
War: Book I, Ft. George Meade, MD: NSA Center for Cryptologic History,
1995.

6\. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy: Vannevar Bush, Ultra, and
the Other Memex, (Metuchen, N. J.: The Scarecrow Press, 1994), Ch. 14.

7.(U) NSA OP-20-G, J.T. Pendergrass, \"Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed
Digital Computing Machines,\" 1946. (U) NSA, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"Influence of United States Cryptologic Organizations on the Digital
Computer Industry\" dates the beginning of Goldberg to 1947, perhaps on
the basis of the date of the contract for the machine rather than on the
date of the start of the explorations for a universal scanning machine.

8.(IS\#ei) NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. H. Campaigne, \"Reading TUNNY,\" NSA
Technical Journal, (Fall 1962). (J8//SBJ A fascinating source for the
history of OP-20-G are Campaigne\'s War Diaries,

1943-1945.

9\. (U) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder, Box 8, OP-20-G4, \"Report on
conference held at Navy Department 15 May 1946. \"Survey of large scale
automatic computing machines, given by J. von Neumann,\" Howard
Campaigne, 16 May 1946.

10\. (U) Martin Campbell-Kelly and Michael R, Williams (ed.), The Moore
School Lectures: Theory and Techniques for the Design of Electronic
Digital Computers (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985).

11\. (¥8} NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study,
Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963.




TOP BbCHUHlUMWIIlKfcL U!A &Ub, IWt UW UNU tUUIXr

(TO//6I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT,
Phase 111: Third Addition,\" i November 1956. (U) \"Remarks at the
Dedication of John von Neumann Hall/\' NSA Technical Jourrad, VI (Winter
1961): i-CB) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Morns Pomerantz and Lawrence A,Sames,
\"Data Distribution Network for the TABLON Mass Storage System,\" circa
1970.

12\. fPS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Lt. Cdr. J.T. Pendergrass, \"High Speed
Digital Computing Machines, Cryptanalytic Uses of,\" 15 October,
1946(T0//0I) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, H. H. Campaigne and J.T. Pendergrass,
\"Second Report on Cryptanalytic Use of High Speed Digital Computing
Machines,\" 0P20-L, 18 December 1946. Campaigne wrote one of the
programs in the first report, but that has not been remembered. He was
listed as the joint author in the second one

13\. (U) It is important to note that the reports did not claim that the
machine was an efficient data processor. All of the many examples were
cryptanalytic ones, and processing-heavy methods such asT/A were not
mentioned.

14\. PES) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Lt. Cdr. J.T. Pendergrass, \"High Speed
Digital Computing Machines, Cryptanalytic Uses of,\" 15 October 1946,1.

15\. (U) von Neumann had, at first, favored a fouraddress system, then
changed to the one-address idea because it would be better suited to
mathematical machines. Pendergrass thought that the one-address was best
for crypto-work. In contrast the SIS computer pioneers favored the
four-address system.

16\. PT0//3-T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne and J.T.
Pendergrass, \"Second Report on Cryptanalytic Use of High Speed Digital
Computing Machines,\" OP-20-L, 18 December 1946. The available copy of
this report did not contain the Mercury program, but it was cited as
part of the report on page 1.

17\. (M NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\"
\"Status of Digital Computers, November 1946.\"

18\. C\*y NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\"
\"Status of Digital Computers, 20 January 1947.\"

19\. (\"R\^He included Alan Turing\'s work.

20.t\$-NSACCH Series XII Z, Ann M.Ford, \"The Birth of Atlas 1, NSA
Technical Journal, XVIII (Winter

1973); 53

21\. GHWST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by

Dr. Campaigne on RAM Panel Meetings,\" notes on the 13 November 1946
meeting clearly show that the digital computer was seen as a practical
cryptanalytic tool, not just a research machine.

22\. m NSA AHA ACC-32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\"
\"Memorandum for Research Division and Section Heads,\" 23 January

1947

23\. m NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ann M. Ford, The Birth of Atlas I,\" NSA
Technical Journal, XVII \[ (Winter 1973); 53

24\. (U) On the interesting Aiken designs, Michael K. Williams, A History
of Computing Technology, (Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall, 1985).

25\. \^S) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\"
\"Estimated Delivery to NCML,\" circa 1951. Atlas was given anAA
priority; that was higher than Goldberg\'s, at least during the late
1940s.

26\. m NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\" CNO
to Chief of Bureau of Ships, 23 May 1947.\"

27\. ffS\#ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" notes of meeting of 22 November 1946, page 2, shows
\"G\" believed RCA and the NBS were soon going to build a computer.

28\. pFfl//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948,10. (¥S//OIj NSA CCH
Series XII Z,\"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,\"
report of 14 November 1946 meeting.

29\. (Q NSA CCH XIK, Box 8, Snyder, \"An Evaluation ofNSA\'s Atlas I,\"
Ann Ford H12, 8 November 1970. March seems to have been a critical month
in Atlas history. \"G\" decided to build its own machine because no
vendor seemed willing to do so.

30\. (\$ NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder,\"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\"
\"Summary of Conference on Task 13 (Atlas),\" 19 and 21 August 1947.

31\. (§) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\"
\"Second Revision of


TOP GEORET/fGOMIHT/mCL UGA, AUG, GAM GBR AND NZU/X1


top nconcT/zooMiHTOnri uoa, auj, law opn mhu mu/xi

er

Military Characteristics of the Analytic Computi (ATLAS),\" 6 July 1948.

32\. (U) W. W. Stifler (ed.), High-Speed Computing Devices, (New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1950), 370.

33- (U) Apparently, the proposed MIT tube was quite like Wilkes\'.

34- (U) The result, a Selectron, was not available until the early
1950s. It was used in one von Neumann type of computer, but never
afterward. One of the many leaps in computer technology had made it a
technological dinosaur.

35- (•¥») NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949,\" Meeting of April 15,1947.

36\. (TD//0E) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948. Electrostatic storage
had also been planned for Goldberg.

37\. (TS//S\*) NSA AHAACC 11112, \"Interim Report on Computer Research,\"
circa 1948.

38\. (U) On microfilm, (S) NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, Box 12,
\"Analytic Machinery Principles,\" September 1949. On Atlas\' drum,
\^¥8)\"NSA AHA ACC 13643 \"Atlas I.\"

39\. (U) Philip J. Bochicchio has recounted his experiences with the
earliest magnetic drums. He stated that in 1945, after gaining access to
captured German equipment, he created a primitive drum that was taken by
Joe Eachus to ERA That inspired ERA stated Mr. Bochicchio.

40\. (¥S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Report of the Second Computer Study
Group,\" as in NSA Technical Journal, XIX (Winter 1974): 21-61. (TS) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,
1945-1949.\"

41\. {S} There were problems with the Goldberg drums, and they were run
at a low 240 rpm. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Goldberg Progress
Reports,\" 30 December 1947 through 10 April 1951.

42\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948. (SS-) NSA AHA 36746,
Engineering Research Associates, Inc., \"Proposal for An Electronic
Rotor Program,\" 19 December 1946. (IS.) NSA AHA ACC 8252, 0P-20-G,

\"Communications Intelligence Research Plans 1948 \" 7April 1947. mffm)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Joint Long Term Program (Old Planning Material,
19481949) compiled by Doug Hogan.tS\^ NSA AHA ACC 32685 \"Summary of
Conference on Task 13 (Atlas),\" 19 and 21 August 1947.

43- 66} J.J. Eachus, \"SIGMAGE Threshold Control,\" 2 July 1946. (¥S»
NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,
19451949.\" Monogram\'s proposed allocations for computer research for
1949 were quite generous: \$1,000,000 for general-purpose computer work
and \$1,000,000 for SPD and related electronic work. (§} NSA CCH Series
XII Z,BuShips, \"Specifications Sled Navy Models CXOA and CXNQ Block
Diagrams,\" 1 October 1948, Monogram\'s 1948 budget was cut in half by
the bureau, (¥S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder, \"Monogram and RAM
Panel Reports, 1945-1949,\" entry for 21 November 1947.

44- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" notes on 27 July 1948 meeting. CS)-NSA AHA ACC 32685,
folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\" \"Estimated Delivery
toNCML,\" circa 1951. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901,
Yuter Papers, May 20, 1947, ERA Tompkins Report on Atlas, \"shift
GoldbergDemon men to project.\" (U) Erwin Tomash, \"The Start of an ERA:
Engineering Research Associates, Inc., 1946-1955,\" in N. Metropolis, et
al., (ed.), A History of Computing in the Twentieth Century (New York:
Academic Press, 1980), 485-496.

45\. CS) NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 9.

46\. (6) NSA CCH XIK, Box 8, Snyder, \"An Evaluation ofNSA\'s Atlas I,\"
Ann Ford H12, 8 November 1970.

47\. (C\^-NSA AHA ACC 32685 \"First Endorsement

on ERA Inc 23 February 1951. (U) Samuel S.

Snyder \"Influence of United States Cryptologic Organizations on the
Digital Computer Industry,\" The Journal of Systems and Software, 1
(1979): 90-91. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901, Yuter
Papers: Engineering Research Associates, October 9,1946, Meeting on NBS
computer plans, \"Summary of Computing Conferences\"; Tompkins to





Norris, October 19, 1946, \"Computing Business\"; December 1946,
\"Reports onOP-20-G Projects and Atlas Computer\"; and Goldberg Report,
June 27,1947.

48.tS7YSI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers, by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 7- t&r NSA AHA ACC 32685, \"Atlas
I\" circa 1952.

49- (9//BQ NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers, by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 7.

50\. (¥S) NSA AHA 6851 Atlas Analytic Computer, \"Military
Characteristics of the Analytic Computer (Atlas),\" June 1947- NSA AHA
ACC 13643, \"Memoranda on Electronic Computers, Atlas I,\" circa 1952.
(S\^-NSA AHA ACC 32685 \"AFSA-351 Atlas Programming Bulletin No 1,\"
February 1951.

51\. te)-NSA CCH XIK, Box 8, Snyder, \"An Evaluation ofNSA\'s Atlas I,\"
Ann Ford H12, 8 November 1970, 8.

52\. (8//0r) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers, by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 8.

53-£S} NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Report of the Second Computer Study
Group,\" as in NSA Technical Journal XIX (Winter 1974): 21-61. \*Q NSA
CCH XIK, Box 8, Snyder, \"An Evaluation ofNSA\'s Atlas I,\" Ann Ford
H12, 8 November 1970.

54- &) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, \"Atlas Computer Correspondence,\" CNO
to Chief of Bureau of Ships, 23 May 1947.

55- {SfNSA CCH Series XI K Box 8, Snyder, \"Yearly Cost of
Representative NSA Machines,\" May

1955

56\. {S} NSA Technical Literature Series Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 11. (TS//SI) NSA AHA
ACC 30851, \"Historical Notes on Computers at NSA\" suggests that
metallic tapes were planned.

57\. (U) On the naming of the machine, (S//3i) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral
History Interview OH 0482 with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982. The
most complete survey of Abner is (6)-NSA CCH Series XII Z and XIK
Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, \"And Then

There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December 1979. See
also, (U) Samuel S.Snyder, \"Abner: The ASA Computer, Part I: Design,\"
NSA Technical Journal,XXV No. 2 (Spring, 1980): 49. (U) Samuel S.
Snyder, History of NSA General Purpose Electronic Digital Computers,
1964.

58\. (U) The electronic group had some sixty employees in 1946.

59\. (C) NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S, Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979,1-6.

60\. Wf&) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982, 70.

61\. t\^-NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979, I-10. (¥9) NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Box 8, Mary Neely
Roseboro, CSGAS-76C, \"Commentary on the Pendergrass Report,\" 15
October 1947.

62\. £S\#Sf) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982,121.

63\. (U) See also, R. M. Bloch et al., \"Logical Design of the Raytheon
Computer,\" Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to Computation, 3
(October 1948): 286.

64\. (S//6I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982,121. The UNIVAC design had a serious
shortcoming for cryptanalytic work. The standard UNIVAC had a decimal
(BCD) organization. That meant it was not suited to handle many
crypto-tasks. Especially important were the new targets of the
crypto-groups, the baudot-based binary systems. The analysis of such
systems demanded bit-by-bit testing, as did many of the older targets.
(fi//3f) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electivnic Digital
Computers,by Samuel S.Snyder, 1964,13

65\. CflS} NSA CCH Series XII X-MPRO, U.S. Cryptanalytic Research and
Development Committee, \"Joint Long Term Program for Research and
Development in the Field of Cryptanalytic Equipment,\" 21 July 1948. (S)
NSA CCH Series XI K




TOfr SECREV/COMINIJJKfcL UbA, AUb, LAW bUR ANU NZU/XI

Box 8, Sam Snyder, \"Evaluation of Computers as Crypt Aids,\" 7
September 1948.

66\. (TTT Mina Rees, \"The Mathematical Sciences and World War II,
American Mathematical Monthly, 87(1980): 607-621. William Aspray and
Michael Gunderloy, \"Early Computing and Numerical Analysis at the
National Bureau of Standards,\" Annals of the History of Computing ,11
(1989): 3-11. John Todd, \"John Hamilton Curtiss, 1909-1977,\" Annak of
the History of Computings (1980): 104-9. R- Cochrane, Measures for
Progress: A History of the National Bureau of Standards (Washington: G.
P. O., 1966). Samuel S.Snyder, \"Abner: The ASA Computer, Part 1:
Design,\" NSA Technical Journal, 25 (1980): 49.

67\. (\$ffS¥) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers,by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964,13.{€)-NSA CCH Series XII Z and XI K
Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, \"And Then There Were Two, the Abner
Story,\" Fourth Draft, December 1979,1-13.

68\. {G) NSA CCH Series XII Z and XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S, Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979,1-13

69\. (3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers,by Samuel S.Snyder, 1964, 12. Raytheon also chose a more
data-oriented design with four addresses for its RAYDAC.

70\. (¥8} NSA CCH Series XI, Snyder, Box 8, folder, \"Snyder Computer
Trips, 1947-1951.\" (€} NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9,
Samuel S. Snyder, \"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth
Draft, December 1979,1-14.

71\. (U) James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary of Data Processing:
Biographies (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987), 64.

72\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979,1-15.

73- (U) Samuel S.Snyder, \"Abner: The ASA Computer, Part I: Design,\"
NSA Technical Journal, 25 (1980): 49. Samuel S.Snyder, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 15. {GfNSA CCH
Series XII Z and XI K Snyder, Box 9,

Samuel S, Snyder, \"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth
Draft, December 1979, II-3.

74-\"\^ NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. F. Gingerich, R. A. Leibler, \"Hagelin
Crib D Dragging on a High Speed Automatic Computing Machine,\" 26 August
1949. (£}• NSA CCH Series XIK Box 8, Sam Snyder, \"Evaluation of
Computers as Crypt Aids,\" 7 September 1948.

75\. (U) Samuel S.Snyder, \"Influence of United States Cryptologic
Organizations on the Digital Computer Industry,\" The Journal of Systems
and Software, 1 (1979): 92.

76\. fS\^S\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964,14.

77- (\$&&) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA Geneml-Purpose Electivnic Digital
Computers, by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 15, gives a full list of the
special functions including the \"Swish,\" which was \"the logical
equivalent of a complete high-speed comparator.\" The proposed special
function of Abner found its way into the later Harvest machine.

78\. (¥S) NSA AHA ACC 10842, Ray L. Bowman, \"Engineering Diary,\" circa
1945-1950. (S//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82
with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

79\--\^5 NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979, II-15. The security clearance problem seems to have, again,
complicated matters. It made communications difficult. The NBS faced
severe problems because of \"loyalty\" questions in the early 1950s.

80\. rSj NSA CCH Series XII Z,AFSA-32, Marvine Bass, \"On Methods and
Speed of Construction of Involuntary Matrices,\" August 1950.

81\. (S) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder Box 10, \"Extracts from AFSA-351D
Weekly Reports reSeac Production.\"

82\. (&) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder Box 10, \"Extracts from AFSA-351D
Weekly Reports re Seac Production.\"

83\. \^ NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979, III-19.

TOP SEeEETf/COMINTOWEL USA, AU3, CAM QDR AND NZU/XI




84\. OS) NSA CCH Series XII Z and XIK Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979,1-2.

85\. -ffi\^-NSA Technical literature Series, Monograph No. 2, Samuel
S.Snyder, History of NSA GeneralPurpose Electronic Digital Computers,
1964,16.

86\. fS) A useful personal insight into Abner is Russell Chauvenet,
\"Early Days in NSA Computing,\" Cryptolog, August 1977: 8-10.

87\. (S}-NSA Technical Literature Series Monograph No. 2, Samuel
S.Snyder, History of NSA GeneralPurpose Electronic Digital Computers,
1964, 17. Abner was ready for its checkout phase in September 1951. All
its instructions were accepted in April 1952.

88\. (€) NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979, IV-14. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,to Cryptolog editor, by R. L.
Bernard, \"Comments on Abner,\" 18 January 1978.

89\. &)■ NSA CCH Series XI K Box 8, Snyder, \"Yearly Cost of
Representative NSA Machines,\" May 1955.

90\. (3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital
Computers, by Samuel S. Snyder, 1964,18.

91\. \<£)- NSA CCH Series XII Z and XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder,
\"And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,\" Fourth Draft, December
1979, IV-8. (TS) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder, Box 16, List of Operational
Abner Programs.

Page 262 TOP SECWZT/ZCOMINTORCL USA, AU3, CAW QDR AND MZLf/XI



