Chapter 7

\(U) The Magic Continues

\(U) Would History Repeal Itself\*

\(U) Hindsight might lead one to think it would have been easy to predict
the futuie of the United States and its signals intelligence services
after World War II. The Cold War and res consequences for America\'s
military, industrial, and academic life seem \"natural.\" The rise of
Big Science, the development of a new type of university, and the growth
of a massive intelligence establishment intertwined with public and
private high technology institutions appear historically inescapable.
Even the close relationship among Western nations, as reflected by the
formation of NATO, and the exceptional cooperation between the
intelligence agencies of Britain and the United States appear to have
been foreordained.

\(U) But in 1945 all of that was in the future, and much of it came as a
surprise to the nation and to the leaders of the American communications
intelligence community. For contemporaries, the future was uncertain. No
one imagined that America was going to build a multibilliondollar
intelligence bureaucracy that seemed to have a life of its own. In fact,
for those in the cryptanalytic organizations in early 1945, there were
signs they might return to the isolated and have-not world of the 1930s,
an era when American politicians condemned \"reading other gentlemen\'s
mail.\" The concerns about STGTNTs future had some foundation.
Communications from the White House were less than subtle reminders that
even the Soviets\' communications should be treated as sacred.

(TS//SI) None of the codebreakers wanted a reversion to the attitudes
and inadequate budgets of the 1930s, but a few thought that some degree

of isolationism might be useful. They reasoned that c. WcV tcixt\'p
monies flowing to SIGINT would be to ena World War II\'s dependency on
Great Britain. A handful of influential men in the intelligence
community suggested that the ties to Britain\'s ci\^ptanalytic
organizations be cut. With America\'s policymakers having to depend only
on \"G\" and the SIS, they reasoned, there would be a decreased chance
of their allocations being slashed. 1

fTS/-/-\^) Those beliefs were significant and contributed to the
rejection of one of the most generous offers Britain ever made to the
United States. The British had come to consider their attack on tl:e
Fish systems as their great cryptanalytic achievement. They saw it as
their intellectual and, because of Colossus, their technological
triumph. They also viewed Fish as an example of the cryptanalytic
systems of the future. They foresaw the day when most systems would rely
upon baudot-teletype, not Morse transmissions.

0FS//S9-When they offered the United States one of their Colossus
machines in the summer of 1945, and more than hinted it would be
followed by the cryptosecrets it required, they were shocked toleg.rn
their offer was rejected. They found it difficult to understand why and
so did some Americans. Joseph Wenger wanted a Colossus in the United
States, but the head of the technical arm of the SIS, Frank Rowlett,
thought it unwise to accept a machine that was so complex and so
expensive to maintain. 2 Combined with the desire for autonomy,
Rowlett\'s objections were convincing.

\(U) The rejection did not mean that American SIGINT planners were sure
of their technological future. Men like Joseph Wenger had good reason




to fear the consequences of peace. World War II had not yielded
permanent solutions to most of the problems that had frustrated him and
Bush during the 1930s. The goal of creating a permanent
intelligence-gathering capability had not been achieved and, certainly,
the grand institutional dreams of Admiral Hooper had not been fulfilled.

\(U) And as the war was ending, the achievements that had been made in
the previous four years were threatened. It appeared that OP-20-G and
the SIS would have to struggle to improve if not just maintain their
powers. And they would have to do it alone. America seemed to be
returning to a prewar institutional profile. The corporations, the
universities, and the military were pulling apart.

\(U) Big Science seemed about to be torn down. Vannevar Bush\'s NDRC had
been a generous but only temporary big brother for the military and the
aspiring research universities. In 1945. when NDRC funds were being cut
off, no one was sure that academics wanted to or could continue to
supply intellectual and technical solutions to the military.

\(U) A greater cause for worry was the indications that the unity of
purpose among the large corporations and the government was about to
end. The relationship that had developed during the war seemed to be too
costly to maintain. Industry\'s desire to return to high-profit work
appeared to be impossible to overcome. No military agency could
guarantee the high and consistent rates of return needed to persuade
major corporations to continue to devote themselves to responding to
military needs.

CSS) In addition, the private sector gave few indications that it would
support expensive longterm investigations and developmental work that
might compensate for the termination of the wartime research programs.
Many promising technologies that had appeared during the boun

ty years of the war stood in danger of being ignored as military budgets
declined. It seemed unlikely, for example, that universities would
continue the type of research into radio wave propagation that had
proven so useful to OP-20G\'s interception program. There also seemed
little hope that corporate programs would lead to the advanced
demultiplexing equipment that the army and navy so desperately needed to
tap into the modern transmission systems of their targets. 3

\(U) The prediction of the future of the federal scientific establishment
was not comforting. The best forecast seemed one of a return to the lean
1930s. A weak National Bureau of Standards, a small navy Office of
Research and Inventions in competition with a feeble ONR, and an army
communications research program confined to a hungry Signal Corps might
be all that the communications/intelligence agencies could look forward
to.

\(U) During the last months ofthe war, the gloomy predictions seemed to
be coming true. Although the post-World War II situation would be
infinitely better than during the 1920s, the army and navy cryptanalytic
agencies would not have the partners, the resources, nor the autonomy
they had during the preceding four years. It was not easy for them to
continue to be technologically innovative, and, although they had a few
more years of cryptanalytic \"magic,\" they soon found it nearly
impossible to meet the challenges of their most important cryptologic
adversaries.

\(U) What There Wasn\'t

\(U) Like the story of OP-20-G and the SIS during the 1930s, the history
of computers, automated cryptanalysis, and data processing in the SIGINT
agencies between 1945 and the mid1950s can be understood only in the
context of what was not available to America\'s codebreakers. What
wasn\'t there extends to much more than hardware. The institutional
structure need





edfor adynamic response to technologically sophisticated
mathematical/cryptanalytic confrontations did not exist. As important,
World War II had not led to any great cryptanalytic methods revolutions.
Although there had been much effort, mathematical cryptanalysis was
something that still had to be created.

\(U) There is a long list of other particulars. Chief among the
\"missing\" were the modern computer and an industry willing to provide
the special types of devices required for codebreaking and traffic
analysis.4 In 1945 the modern electronic digital computer was still a
wish whose outlines were just being drawn. There were no commercial
firms that were investing large amounts in its development, and
academia, though willing, showed little sign of being able to carry the
financial burden of bringing the universal computer to life.

\(U) And many of those who saw the new electronic computer slowly
emerging from university and corporate centers had very serious
questions if that \"serial\" machine could ever have the power needed to
conquer cryptanalytic enemies. The critics of the emerging
general-purpose computer desired machines with more complex
architecture, ones that relied upon multiple processors and parallel
action. Such machines seemed unlikely to appear on their own, however.
There were no indications that any outside group would even attempt to
bring such alternative architecture to life without direct and massive
support from the codebreaking community.5 Worse, few companies seemed
willing to take the money OP20-G and the SIS did have to spend on
automation. Both agencies experienced great difficulty before the 1950s
in finding responsible contractors who would commit to building the
latest generation of special-purpose electronic devices.

\(U) Intellectual resources were also absent. The in-house mathematical
groups that the two agencies had created had to be vastly reduced in
size at the close of the war. There was no ready

made substitute. The American universities had not yet reestablished
ways to link themselves to secret military projects, and the armed
services and their major contractors had yet to invent the \"think
tank.\" The Rand Corporation, with its ability to allow academics to
change into strategic planners, remained only a thought in the mind of
the most aggressive air force generals.

\(U) Institutional power was declining. Neither OP-20-G nor the SIS was
sure that it could maintain the degree of autonomy granted to it during
the war. The \"G\" section and the \"F\" group stood under the threat of
losing their freedom to design machines and to select who was to build
them.

\(U) Despite an immediate postwar generosity that extended the life of
some programs, there were indications in early 1945 that signals
intelligence might have to remain passive, only waiting on the sidelines
while, hopefully, someone else made the great technological leaps needed
to match advances in code and cipher making.

\(V) Signs of Some Appreciation

\(U) However, during 1945 there was some encouraging news. The SIS\'s and
OP-20-G\'s wartime achievements had made them a few very good and very
influential friends in the military. From the most important generals
and admirals came words of praise for Ultra. With a little convincing by
advocates such as Joseph Wenger, that praise was turned into promises by
America\'s leaders to provide at least some of the resources needed to
maintain and, perhaps, improve communications intelligence capabilities.

\(U) Although budgets were slashed and work forces seriously reduced, the
SIS and OP-20-G were granted more than should have been expected given
their treatment in the 1930s. The fiftypercent reduction in the amount
of IBM equipment in 1946, for example, still left the agencies





with 300 machines. That was tens of times more than what was on hand at
the start of the war. 6

(TS//SI) The SIS was allowed a staff of 1,500, and \"G\" retained some
700 people - infinitely greater numbers than had been allocated to the
services during the 1920s and 1930s. That gave some hope that although
the United States had not yet decided to take responsibility for
policing the entire world, a signals shutdown was unlikely7

\(U) Significant for the history of computers and cryptanalysis were the
numbers of \"technical\" slots allocated to each agency. Both had
approximately five percent of their staff approved to work on advanced
technological and scientific matters. Those ratios were maintained
during the postwar period, with the navy gaining a slight but important
edge over the army in the numbers of high tech employees.8 The technical
sections were not large enough to support huge in-house production
capabilities, but they were capable of pursviing some research and
creating smaller machines.

\(U) More than numbers of people indicated the value military leaders
placed on centralized SIGINT. Although no firm promises could be made in
1945, hints were dropped that none of the cryptotechnologies would be
abandoned. Whether the favored technology was the IBM tabulator-relay
combinations or the electromechanical components in Madame X, they would
be given a chance to develop into more powerful versions of what had
emerged during the war.

\(U) The most tantalizing hint concerned the possibility of an aggressive
new Rapid Machine program. During late 1944 and 1945 the army and navy
engineers were allowed to draw up some relatively long-term plans for
very advanced machines. Different groups had their favored approaches.
Many in the agencies wanted to concentrate on extending the reach of the
workhorse tabulating equipment. Others sought continuity

through extending the reach of the Bush Comparator. A few continued to
have faith in the type of analog and microfilm devices that had been
built at Eastman-Kodak. Of course, there were vocal advocates for
turning digital electronics into operational machines.

fES-) There was a consensus on the role of SIGINT in developing all the
technologies: \"G\" and the SIS should play an active part in bringing
to life any new hardware. That was almost inescapable. There was much to
be done and few on the outside willing to do it. There was no
general-purpose electronic device that was a great advance over Bush\'s
old Comparator, and even the mundane, such as input and output
technology, remained at the early levels. 9

\(U) More MA GTC: Cryptanalysis Continues as Before

(T3//SI) The chance to finally build analytic machines that would put
America ahead of the technology of encryption seemed favorable during
the first postwar years. One reason for that was America\'s continued
cryptanalytic successes. The machines it had in hand were providing
intelligence. In several instances \"G\" and \"F\" had to hurry to
finish new machines, but, in general, the agencies did not have to
concentrate, as during the war, on emergencies. For three years after
the end of World War II, there was every indication that the kind of
triumphs that had been achieved during the early 1940s would continue.
As important, even the most dangerous ofthe nation\'s adversaries had
decided to refrain from creating military crises. Success gave the
agencies time to look ahead.

(¥g//0ij The impressive work ofthe American SIGINT agencies continued on
after the Japanese surrender; remarkably, it even seemed to be
improving. Every type of code and cipher used by every important nation
was or seemed about to be conquered. Despite the introduction of more
sophisticated methods and




IUH bECRETOCOMINT/mEL TO USA, AU3, CAM, ODR, AND NZU/X1

machines, some 70 percent of the systems of the minor nations were
\"readable\" in 1946 and 1947, and over half of those of the three new
major targets were, to a significant degree, open to the United
States. 10

(TG//SI) With help from the British, some of the most critical and well
defended of the Soviet codes and ciphers were yielding information.
There was every reason to believe that what had been accomplished
against the Germans and Japanese would be repeated against Russia and
its allies. Progress seemed inescapable. By 1947, for example, engineers
at the army and navy centers could build relay analogs of some of the
important Russian cipher devices, just as they had built analogs after
Japan\'s Purple machine had been penetrated. 11

CES//ST) The systems being entered were important. It appeared that, as
in World War II, America would be able to gain critical intelligence
through the interception and analysis of a relatively small number of
messages, ones which would reveal the strategic thinking of the
political and military leaders of Russia and its client states.12 During
the first postwar years, old attacks and machines were doing quite well.
More than operator errors and busts were leading the Americans and
British into the Soviet additive codes, \[

c

I Although Russia\'s new Hmachine proved stubborn,

there was hope that a persistent search using traditional tools would
uncover its wiring and its indicator system. 13

(G//0I) That image of a consistent SIGINT future shaped the nature of
the immediate postwar machine development programs at the army\'s and
the navy\'s Washington headquarters. Both agencies sought cryptanalytic,
not \"data,\" machines. The goal in the first postwar years was to
create new generations of machines to break

complex codes and ciphers. Other possible sources of information,
including traffic analysis, were left to older machines and methods.

(TS//6I) Something besides that cryptovision shaped the initial postwar
plans. It was thought that, unlike the years of the Atlantic U-boat
crisis, no massive and emergency machine construction program would be
needed. 14

\(U) A Cryptanalytic Future: Architecture and Ambiguity and Budgets

\(U) Everyone saw the future of \"G\" and the SIS as centered on the
traditional cryptanalytic function. Traffic analysis, direction finding,
and analysis of enemy clear text might play roles but very small ones.
But all was neither secure nor settled, especially in 1945 when plans
for both immediate and long-term machine development were being created.
Although there was an agreement about general target priorities for the
immediate postwar era, the exact nature of the cryptosystems and
machines that might be confronted was not predictable. 15

£¥&fflsl) Some trends were evident, however.

J His company\'s products would proba

bly be used by every nation. The second trend was towards the adoption
of on-line machines. Many nations were adopting the type
ofbaudotteleprinter and multiplexed systems that had formed the backbone
ofthe German Fish networks.

(T3//3f) In addition, there were at least concerns that Enigma-like
wired rotor machines might reappear, and it seemed likely that
superenciphered code systems would not vanish with the fall of Japan.The
formidable one-time pad systems that seemed unbreakable when correctly
used were known to be a favorite of many diplomatic corps.

EO 3.3(h)(2) PL. 86-36




&G.3.3(h)(2) PiL. 86-36


(TS//6I) But nothing about target systems, ; with one exception, was so
certain, nor the develjopmeht\>pf the underlying technology for analytic
Imachines so predictable, that a rush to create a ;host of nevv
special-purpose devices was justified An 1945.l6 There was no reason to
build a series of ; high-tech single-purpose, single-system machines,
except \"\'for, some of those manufactured by

CTSfrS\^The

could

fe dealt with through existing relay, even tabulator equipment, as could
many of the remaining additive systems, such as those used by Soviet
\]agencies. Not enough was

known in 1945 about the new teletype-Baudot devices to warrant the
construction of expensive special-purpose contrivances. As well, since
the promises of the discovery of effective pure mathematical methods had
yet to be fulfilled, launchingUnto an expensive search for anew
\"calculation\" machine seemed unjustified.

ffij//SI) Only one type of machine, anew

I ;\\ \[deserved special technological attention

atthei end of the war. It was the\'fj

series! The Americans knew it was going to be used; for high-level
systems by many important nations; they had enough knowledge of its
inner workings to challenge it; and they were confident they eould pick
the correct attacks.17 As a result, although many new machines would be
built, the only adventurous special-purpose RAM planned for a specific
problem at the end of the war was for thf\~T

\(U) The Enigma Is Dead (We Think); Long Live the

ffS//H) The first step towards anew machine program at\"G\" and the SIS
was to sort out what WWII machines should be abandoned. All but a score
of the navy Bombes were destroyed, and the million dollar Madame Xwas
taken apart. The Duennas, the other elaborate

Bombes, and the electronic Scritcher were kept, however.19 It was
thought they could be used against other rotor machines or the few
Enigmas that might be brought back into use. All the devices that had
been effective against the I I were retained. They were

refurbished and readied to attack diplomatic, civil, and military
traffic from around the world. 20

(TS//SI) The Bombes and the other «E

analogs were useless against




-EO 3.3(h)(2) PL. 86-36


CE8//8ij The investment needed to conquer\'\" the morel \\ seemed

reasonable. And success would provide invaluable returns. For example,
with Germany and\^ Japan defeated, stripped oftheir colonies,\^


ffSffST) The potential rewards from investing in attacks against other
nations\' Hagelins were even greater. j\^ras \"the\" manufactur

erof cryptodevices, and every nation, business, and bank in any part of
the world had to rely upon his products. From South America to Northern
Europe to Arabia, if automated encryption was being intercepted, it was
probably the product of a£\\ There was one other very important

aspect of the

one that helped

launch the American cryptanalytic attacks against it. Thel

jmachines could be purchased on

the open market and their inner workings closely

studied.

\(U) A Hangover from Another Time

(T0//8Ij One of the first postwar \|\_

\]

RAMs had a strange beginning. It dated to when the navy still thought it
would have to launch a bloody invasion against Japan.22 \"G\'s\"
mathematicians needed a large and fast digraph counting machine to
attack various Japanese systems. The device had to be much more powerful
than the creaky Mike. Although it would be expensive to build, \"G\"
approved a request for the \"counter.\" But the machine was almost
canceled when Japan surrendered. Fortunately, the mathematicians were
able to convince Engstrom and Wenger to continue the project. They
agreed that despite the about-to-appear second Freak at Arlington Hall,
the navy needed a universal

counting device for its postwar missions. It would help, they realized,
in the initial mathematical studies of unbroken systems and machines. 23

6FS//0I) With promises of financing in hand, machine designers were
consulted about technological options. It was decided that the original
proposal to build a machine to handle an alphabet greater than
sixty-four characters was impractical. Also quickly rejected was the
idea of basing the counting machine on a film-analog .combination as had
been recommended earlier.

(T8//gij The \"G\"NCML team explored other possible technologies and
then made a surprising decision. Although \"G\" was filled with
advocates of electronics, its engineers decided to let the army\'s Freak
carry the risks of building an \"electronic\" counter. Whether
condensers or tubes were used, said the NCML crew, too many of them
would be needed for a useful digraph machine. With a sixty-four by
sixty-four matrix and the counters required to handle up to 999, the
number of components, they concluded, would be too great. There would
have to be more than 3\*997 counters, each needing three positions.
Temperamental electric or electronic parts meant too many errors and too
much \"down time.\" For the navy\'s engineers, old-fashioned reliable
electromechanical counters were the only viable alternative.

6ffi//9Jr)\" They were close to gaining the final approval of the
cryptanalysts; then someone calculated the speed of the machine if it
used the offthe-shelf industrial counters. The device would be
incredibly slow, as sluggish as the old frustrating Mike. There was a
standoff. The codebreakers wanted a fast machine, but the engineers
would not accept the responsibility of an electronic device. After much
wrangling, they arrived at a compromise. The engineers decided they
would take the responsibility of designing custom-made mechanical
counters that were fast enough to please the cryptanalysts.





EO 3.3(h)(2) P.L. 86-36

GES//0IJ After outlining the new counters, the engineers sought a
contractor. Unfortunately, \"G\'s\" two largest World War II
contractors, NCR and IBM, did not want to take the project. \"G\" had
nowhere to go, and the machine was put on hold during much of 1945 and
1946.

(TS//8\*) \"G\" waited until its \"captive corporation,\" Engineering
Research Associates, was formed before it put any more effort into the
counter-project. But once ERA agreed to take the contract, \"G was sure
it would soon have a useful and reliable machine.That was a rather naive
assumption, however.

(T8//SI) What became known as Alcatraz did not appear until 1950, had
about half the power originally planned, and was much more expensive
than expected. Once in operation, it threw technological tantrums. It
had problems with its large printer, and the expense of maintaining the
machine led to Alcatraz\'s very early retirement in 1954-24


P Alcatraz (U) Mrs. O\'Malley\'s Wayward Son

(S//8I) Another of the special devices OP-20G thought it had to have in
order to deal with its postwar targets became, arguably, the largest

electronic imitation of an adding machine ever built. Filling half a
room with vacuum tubes, relays, a special card reader constructed by the
IBM spin-off Commercial Controls, and a tabulator\'s printer, O\'Malley
was one of postwar \"G\'s\" earliest and most challenging projects.

(S//SI) Something like O\'Malley had been desired since 1942, but it was
the growing backlog of messages I \"\"\"I and

some technological advances that sparked its final design in 1947.
O\'Malley was the cryptanalysts\' special and very grand version of what
IBM had introduced at the end of 1946, an electronic multiplying
machine. O\'Malley had to be special and had to go beyond IBM\'s
offering because it was to accomplish what Bush and Wenger had agreed
was not achievable in the mid-i930s, the automation of the advanced
version of an ICtest, Chi.

(0//0I) The cryptanalysts\' \"Chi\" was a very close relative of the Chi
Square test. Chi Square is a now familiar statistical method for
determining if two distributions came from the same \"universe.\" It
seems commonplace and unsophisticated today, but in the 1940s,
especially because of the tedious calculations it needed, Chi seemed
very advanced. It was one of the most sophisticated ways to identify
cipher alphabets produced by the same key. 25

(S//SI) As it was used in cryptanalysis, \"Chi\" was computationally
demanding. The frequencies of each letter in one cipher text had to be
multiplied against the corresponding frequencies in another text: then
the products had to be summed and used in the algorithm which determined
whether or not the sum was





likely to have been produced by chance. To isolate probable \"same key\"
messages called for testing each text against all the others. That meant
thousands of multiplications, hundreds of additions, and dozens of
evaluations for the simplest attacks.

(3//8I) The manpower-starved \"G\" realized that if the World War II
victories against!

devices were to be continued, it had to have an ultra-powerful machine
for accumulating the frequencies, calculating the sums of
cross-products, identifying the \"significant\" sums, and displaying the
results. Given the exploding Workload of those charged with keeping up
with thej generated traffic, it was decided that an electronic
high-speed multiplier was worthy of an enormous financial investment.

(G//SI) The new navy contractor, Engineering Research Associates (ERA),
was asked to build a super-fast machine that could recognize individual
letters, tally them, and then perform all the thousands of
multiplication and summations needed to identify those cipher messages
whose letter frequencies \"correlated.\" And it was asked to produce it
quickly. \"\*

(S//SI) That was a demanding request in the technological context of
1947. ERA was expected to produce a machine more powerful than what had
been developed by the world\'s largest and most advanced computing
machine company: the IBM 603 electronic calculator, which had been
introduced in late 1946. 27

(S//SI) Within a year and one-half, the men in St. Paul were able to
build an electronic \"calculator\" several orders more complex than the
IBM device; but the need to shift attention to the production of another
machine, one for critical SIGINT fire fighting, led toO\'Malley

being far below original expectations. To save design and production
time, O\'Malley became a \"get the job done\" machine. It was stripped
of many of its intended powers so that it could be out into operation as
soon as possible.

(\$//3f) Many of the interesting technical challenges inO\'Malley\'s
original specifications were avoided. First, it was decided that, as in
the 1930s, recognizing and tallying letters were chores best done by
older methods and technologies. Separate machines would prepare the
letter frequency counts. O\'Malley was deprived of even more functions.
It did not include the circuitry needed for an automatic test for the
significance of the results. All the summed cross products were printed,
leaving the analysts with the need to do much hand calculation. And
O\'Malley even

OMalley




10 3.3(h)(2) P\^L 86-36


heeded help reading its input. Given the available I/Q technology, a
special machine had to be constructed to punch tallies into IBM cards in
a special format and the standard IBM readers had to be reconfigured.

(\$\>//0fr Without that jury-rigged equipment and its special dual
teletype tape readers, O\'Maliej would have taken more years to
construct. \*G\" could hot wait, for example, for magnetic drums that
could have provided a highspeed means of presenting two, streams of
data. The quick fixes to the old card and tape technologies had to be
accepted.

(0//0I) O\'Malley became part of the tradition of the relay box and
tabulator combinations of the NC Machines of World War II. Like them and
the new IBM 603, it w\$s a special-purpose (although electronic)
calculation box inserted between tabulator-teletype input and output
equipment. The inside of the machine also reflected the time pressures
under which it was constructed. It certainly did not break any new
logical ground; it was a direct imitation of a decimaKbased
electromechanical calculating machine. It multiplied by following the
traditional method of repeated additions.

(S//Sf) Such conservatism did not mean that O\'Malley was a minor
accomplishment, however. Commercial firms, such as IBM) RemingtonRand,
and UNIVAC, based their early electronic offerings on the same
philosophy of following known architecture and logic. Ring-counter,
decimal machines were the norm. Binary devices were the challenging
exceptions that were very slow to appear on the market or even in the
laboratory. 28

(«/\#»)■ And for its time, O\'Malley did its calculations quite rapidly.
It was able to form and sum as many as thirty-five cross products in one
and one-third seconds. It could have done its work much faster, but it
was limited by its lack of memory and its very slow printer.

(&//Q¥) O\'Malley proved useful for more than its original limited
operational job. When O\'Malley was asked to serve the needs of research
mathematicians, its tubes and relays were persuaded to pretend they
could, for example, invert matrices. 29

(3//GB But all in all, economy and a need to obtain the final equipment
as soon as possible meant that O\'Malley was a compromise that had a
short life. Perhaps it was its recurring I/O problems that led to
O\'Malley\'s untimely and perhaps embarrassing end. It was allowed a
relatively peaceful retirement twenty months after its birth.

(S//J?J\> The Grand

Machine

(TS//St-\> O\'Malley and Alcatraz were not the heart of the planned
postwar attack on the

machines. A very special device had been uhdef consideration well before
Germany\'s defeat. But the central

\]

Hecate, had to wait until \"G\" formed its captive corporation, ERA.

(TS//61) Hecate was more than two years in the making, arriving in
Washington in 1948. Built with the help of the ex-OP-20-G engineers,
such as John Howard, Hecate was a combination of the old and new.

(3\$//0f) But even borrowing from the past did not make Hecate easy to
complete. It was a huge and expensive combination whose cost estimate of
\$86,000 became a delivery price of almost \$250,600.3° Its price tag,
the cost of five World War II Bombes, was justified by results, however.
It and its sister produced a constant I I for more than a

decade.31 Hecate was, in fact, one of the electronic marvels of its
time.

(TG//SI) Hecate contained some true advances, such as its four
high-speed electronic \'ritvgs\" that imitated the in the

rThfiv ran at a very respectable 200 KC

tnhp




IUH bhlKblJJlUMINIUKKL 10 USA, AU3, CAM, ODR, AND NZU/XI


\(U) Ifecate

(100,000 trials a second). And Hecate\'s scritchertype capability of
eliminating branch searches speeded processing enormously. 32

(T3//3I) To save construction time, electronics were employed only where
demands for speed presented no alternative. Hecate might have been even
more innovative, but it was called out of the workshop for immediate
operational needs. Most of the machine was composed of the familiar and
reliable plugboards and relays, and its essential logic was based upon
familiar cryptanalytic-engineering approaches.

(TS//SI) Hecate was not a digital computer and did not calculate. It was
an analog \"crib\" machine with some \"digital\" components. like the
Grenades, it used a short ten- or twelve-letter stretch of suspected
plain text to identify \"starting points.\" And it was not a complete
processor.

Much independent statistical analysis of a system was needed before
Hecate could find the initial settings for a transmission. And its power
was limited to just

(T9// 01) To use Hecate the cribs were set with dials; then a message
was read, letter by letter, into Hecate\'s relay memory through a
standard tape reader. When the relay memory had the required number of
letters in it, the electronic rings were run through their positions
until the parallel flows of electricity through the plugboards and relay
circuits signaled that all the cribplain pairs and ring positions were
consistent, or that all the wheel positions had been tested. At a hit,
the machine stopped and dials indicated the position of the \"rings\"
and the place of the crib in the message. The dials were used because
there


EO 3.3(h)(2)




P.L. 86-36 EO 33(h)(2)

was still no printer that was fast and reliable enough to compete with
hand notation.

-CTO//0IJ- Each of Hecate\'s offset letter tests took approximately
three seconds, excluding the time an operator needed to write down the
hit positions. It took a total of approximately twenty minutes to run a
500-letter message. 33

(T8//SI) Hecate was reliable and effective, but, like the Bombes, she
had some serious deficiencies. Because of the nature of her test,
circuit completion, Hecate could produce too many possible answers. Each
had to be examined by a limited workforce. To reduce the list of
possibilities required difficult-to-find, very precise, and errorfree
cribs. Worse, Hecate could be used againstonly

(TS//SI) Hecate\'s limitations were recognized while it was under
construction, but the machine was needed so badly that it could not be
abandoned nor radically altered.

(TS//6I) OP-20-G had no solution for the


of intelligence. The go-ahead was given for the development of another
special-purpose device, Warlock.


\<3C//0I- ) Warlock I





\(U) Hecate\'s Impressive Competitor

(TS//SI) Warlock was much more adventurous and costly than Hecate, so
much so that it took some four years to design and manufacturer 34 jt
was physically big as well as expensive. It was so large that it had to
be kept at the ERA factory in Minnesota. Warlock turned St. Paul into
something of a remote operations center. 35

(rfi3//Sfj Warlock cost more than \$soo,ooo36 because it called on the
sophisticated cryptanalytictest that the Americans had first used in
Bulldozer, automatic plain language recognitions.37 Automatic
recognition was demanding in its own way; it called for very, very long
cribs. Fortunately, they did not have to be of a specific nature. To
avoid the \"false hits\" that came from short and weak cribs, Warlock
used some seventy-five or more ciphertext letters. All of them were
needed just to eliminate much of the handtesting Hecate runs called for.

(T6//GI) Warlock was a major engineering feat because it was very
difficult to turn highspeed plain language recognition into electronics.
Warlock was piled full ofthe latest electronic tubes and circuits. With
the cipher text in place, super-fast \"digital\" electronic wheels sped

through

weighted each

resulting letter according to its language frequency, then summed all
the results in parallel. An electronic threshold-testing component
decided if the settings and a sample ofthe selected plain text should be
printed.

(TS//SI) One hundred thousand tests a second were performed, which meant
that the plain text could be fully examined in twenty minutes.38 To run
through the

so quickly called for over 6,000 tubes, crystal diode matrices, trays of
relays, flexible electronic matrices, some binary circuitry, the
familiar plugboards and relays, and even a magnetic drum.

(TS//SI) The first Warlock was a machine that could attack just one or a
few sys

tems, but its 1953 version was able to do more ucLduac 01 iia aovdnceo
electronics. riexiDie

machines. For example, Warlock)was asked to; penetrate the mysterious
machine that served all of\"

£TC//SI-)-Although Warlock shared many circuits, components, and ideas
with the general

purpose computer, device with much Bulldozer. Although

it was I a special-purpose ofthe I internal logic of yery effective, it
was a/onefunction machine, something many in the intelligence community,
especially those in charge of budgets, disliked.

(T3//9I) Both thd money managers /and the engineers wanted something
else, a multipurpose cryptanalytic computer, one that could perform any
or all the cryptoattacks.: Such a/machine would never sit idle waitifigj
for messages from a

particular system, nor dinosaur like Madame

would it become a useless X.t°; /

\(U) The Unwersal RAAfjs

38//Sf) Many in QP-2p\^G and the SIS wanted to start designing such a
universal RAM in 1945. They were not abstract types; their RAM was to be
tailored to operational cryptanalytic needs. Those advocates fori the
universal RAMs refused to wait until aimathematical revolution
transformed cryptanalysis or a technological revolution made the
genet-all-purpose programmed computer a competitive! dijyptqtool.

x (T&//0I) For those jlfn favor of universal RAMs, extending the general
cryptanalytic techniques that had proved jjfo/valuable during the war
seemed the only reasonable path for \"G\'s\" postwar machine
prograiti/41 But they wanted to avoid the waste that wenfalong with
creating spe


P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)



iup bhtKfciticmmimtiWEL 10 uoa, auo, qah, oon, and hzl//xi

cial-purpose machines. Given the unknowns about future cryptotechnology
and the need to maximize research and development funds, the wisest
choice for them was to create a machine that could perform all the major
cryptanalytic functions.

ffG//0ftThose major functions fell into a few broad categories. The most
important of the crypto-techniques were based upon either locating
repeated patterns, tallying massive numbers of letter patterns,
stripping possible cipher and recognizing plain text, or performing some
form of \"exhaustive searching,\" such as done by the scritcher
machines.

(T0//0I) The universal RAM was not to be a super-calculator for advanced
mathematical calculation, or a direct analog of a cryptosystem, nor one
that could be called a data processing machine. And although it was
agreed it would be digital and electronic, it was to be something very
special and unique to the cryptanalytic community

(TS//8B In 1945 and early 1946, both agencies made a commitment to find,
if possible, their own versions of one great multipurpose cryptanalytic
engine. 42

\(U) The Illusive Matrix

(T0//0I) The call for the universal RAMs became tied with the search for
an electronic \"matrix.\" The universal machine needed it and so did a
new type of Bombe, one that could attack any type of rotor enciphering
machine through a Turing-like analog test. There was also a demand for
an electronic matrix that would serve as the heart of all the more
digitally oriented dedicated machines of the future, whether they were
for wired-wheel or additive attacks.

(T9//3I) The concepts of the matrices were not well formed in 1945. In
some instances a matrix was described as being high-speed memo

ry, in others as an electronic version of a switch, and instill others
as an analog of an encryption wheel. But whatever the purpose, existing
tube technology made any matrix design very difficult to construct. The
problem that had halted the creation of an electronic Bombe in 1942
continued after the war. The matrices demanded too many tubes to be
practical.

(-RS//SI) Asa result, much of the \"matrix\" effort was concentrated on
developing multipurpose tubes and other basic components. That research
became essential toother projects, including the search for the
multipurpose cryptanalytic machine,43

Cftj//QI\>In addition to the hunt for the electronic \"wheel\" for the
universal RAM, both services had special-purpose uses in mind for an
electronic matrix. Many in the navy wanted, as soon as possible, an
electronic version of the valuable but none-too-well-behaved monster,
Mercury, and the army desired a vastly improved version of its
\"look-up\" devices, the Slide-Run machines. A few wanted an electronic
super Bombe that could tackle many different machine systems through a
Bombe-like test.

£FS} But the demands for a universal machine continued. And soon its
outline became clear. It would be something quite different from the
programmable general-purpose computer.

\(U) It\'s a Nice Idea, Dr. von Neumann, But\...

CCS} As \"G\" and the SIS focused on their versions of one great device
during 1945 and 1946, they came to quite similar concepts of a single
machine that could perform all the general attacks that had proven so
valuable during the war. Both had visions of a \"computer\" that
performed IC tests, crib-dragging, locating, additive stripping, and
weighted plain language testing. The near-universal machines began to be
assigned a generic name, a \"reconfigurable computer.\"





(T0//0I) Neither service was able to build its ideal \"reconfigurable\"
machine during the 1940s because of institutional barriers, the
primitive state of some of the underlying technologies, and emergencies
that called for energies to be devoted to special-purpose machines. But
\"G\" and the SIS went far towards defining a powerful and unique
cryptanalytic computer architecture through their Goldberg and Sled
projects.

fTO//0Ij There were differences between the content and progress of the
two grand dreams, Goldberg at \"G\" and Sled at the SIS,44 but at their
beginnings they shared many fundamentals.

£Ki//flff Neither of the proposed all-purpose machines was conceived of
in terms of the architecture of the modern digital computer. Their
designs were very different, for example, from what was emerging out of
the ENIAC/EDVAC projects at the University of Pennsylvania. They were
not single processor, serial, binary, and program-driven machines, the
type that later became characterized by the term \"von Neumann
architecture.\"

(T0//DI) Such an architecture seemed very inefficient to the
cryptanalysts. Well into the 1960s there were engineers and
cryptanalysts who remained committed to the idea that the digital,
serial, single memory, program-driven \"von Neumann design\" for
computers was an inappropriate model for codebreaking.

(TS//SI) Perhaps that was because their concepts of computers were
problem, not abstraction, driven. The proposed army and navy machines
were not born out of considerations of how to solve any possible logical
or mathematical problem. Neither was intended to be a universal logic or
mathematical device. They were to be extensions of the hardware and
methods that had evolved at the agencies during World War II.

(TS//SI) The first source of inspiration for them came from the
developments in the tabula

tor sections. Both agencies had invested in the creation of very
efficient relay attachments for their tabulating equipment. The special
IBM \"boxes\" became heroic in the eyes of the operating cryptanalysts
and their machine room allies. Each ofthose minicomputers, some ofwhich
were much larger than the tabulators, performed a special function. The
Slide-Run attachments, for example, stripped additives, then searched a
dictionary of high-frequency code groups. The navy\'s NC tabs were also
built from a wide range of functional relay boxes.

(TS//SB- Another source of inspiration was the RAM program\'s faith in
electronics and film and tape inputs. There had been many thoughts of
enlarging the powers of the Comparators and the IC machines through the
use of additional circuits, ones that could be accessed through
convenient plugboard \"programs.\" Putting the counting abilities and
message-offsetting abilities of the Comparators together with the
locating powers of the Copperheads and the weighting capabilities of
Amber seemed a possibility.

GES//S-I) Thus, it was a small evolutionary step to the central idea of
the postwar Sled and Goldberg machines: embody each ofthe major
cryptanalytic functions in separate hardware packages; create a central
switching mechanism; tie the packages together in any desired
configuration through the switch; and hook it all to freestanding
input/output mechanisms. 45

(TS//fli) With a stock ofthe specialized \"boxes,\" the agencies could
instantly create any desired cryptanalytic engine. The cryptanalysts
would not have to wait for two or more years for a traditional type of
special-purpose machine to be built; expensive machines would not become
useless if an adversary changed his system; and the machine rooms would
not be cluttered with devices that were used only a few hours a week.

(TS//SI) In 1945 there seemed, in fact, no alternative to such a
machine. It appeared so nat




ural at the time that it did not have to be justified through a
comparison with other possible architecture. Because the \"von Neumann\"
idea was relatively unknown in 1945, it was only later that the
supporters of the multipurpose cryptanalytic machine concept justified
their ideas through contrasting them to the universal serial computer.
But when they did, they outlined an argument that has had a long life
within the SIGINT community. The arguments against the von Neumann
design have continued for fifty years.

(T0//0I\>Bythe late 1940s, men in both \"G\" and the SIS were pointing
out how their linkedbox architecture would allow parallel processing,
the incorporation, whenever desired, of analog computing, and thus much,
much faster processing. They explained that the von Neumann design would
always be too slow because it had only a single processor to do
everything. To be useful, that processor had to be driven by an outside
program, step by step by step. Hundreds, perhaps thousands of ticks of a
clock had to go by before the most simple ofcrypto-functions could be
completed. Nothing else could be done until the program cycle was
finished.

(T9//3I) However, the special boxes, arranged in the right manner, had
the potential to be hundreds of times faster than the single processor
device. Hardwired functions would always be performed in fractions of
time it took to read and execute programmed instructions. And with the
\"boxes,\" while one function was being completed, another could be
performed. As important, with a set of function boxes on hand, no one
would have to wait the months, or, as it turned out, the years it might
take to write a complex program for a von Neumann machine.

(T0//0I) Most advocates of \"reconfigurable\" machines agreed on other
things in 1945. There was a commitment to use and, if need be, create
new components. The functional packages should be built with advanced
electronics, if at all possi- \' ble, and with new input and output
equipment.

Only electronics could make the machines fast enough to perform the
cryptanalytic tests; and for many of those tests, only new I/O devices
would allow the electronics to work at optimum speeds. 46

\(U) Faith without Institutions: Slides, Sleds, and Skates

OS//S3 In 1945 \"G\" and \"F\" did not realize how difficult it would be
to follow through on their pledges to create a \"universal\"
cryptanalytic machine. Who would be willing to build something just for
the SIGINT community? Who would pay the extra costs that necessarily
came when standard, commercially produced equipment was rejected? Who
could be trusted with the secrets that were embodied in the special
devices?

GB9//STD Although \"G\" and the SIS both sponsored programs to create
reconfigurable non-von Neumann machines at about the same time, and
although the two agencies were required to coordinate their efforts,47
their responses to those questions were quite different. The navy began
its project immediately, but did not stay with all the original
intentions for its Goldberg. The army eventually produced a machine that
fit quite well with the original architectural vision, but it was almost
a decade before its Sled emerged.

\(U) Among the many reasons for the different patterns one stands out:
the navy allowed \"G\" to create, as will be described, a company that
had the skills and the mandate to begin work immediately. In contrast,
the cryptanalysts and engineers at Arlington Hall were left dependent
upon the vagaries of yearly budget allocations and the willingness of
commercial corporations to subject themselves to what might become very
unprofitable projects.

(T0//0I) But the army\'s project did not begin with a cloud over it. Leo
Rosen\'s mid-1945 plea to extend the reach of the tabulator-relay
combinations at Arlington Hall received a warm reception.





The conceptual outlines for what was later called Sled were in the
making by the end of the year, and there were signs that enough men
would be left in his \"F\" section to design if not build the new
all-purpose machine. Not all the functions that were to be turned into
hardware were agreed upon, but there was little opposition to the idea
that at very minimum, Sled would have to perform the cribdragging and
dictionary lookup functions of the invaluable Slide-Run machines of
World War II. More ideas were contributed as to what functions should be
included and, as important, how they could be designed to meet the goal
of having, when desired, plugboard-programmed parallel processing. 48

(8//SI) The evolving ideas even attracted the cryptanalysts and
engineers at\"G,\" especially those who had worked with the tabulator
and NC machines. Already mandated by the government to coordinate as
much research and development as possible, \"G\" and the SIS agreed they
should work together on Sled. Each looked forward to having a Sled with
electronic components within a short time. 49

(T6//SI) However, the program ground to a near halt. Not enough
resources and equipment remained in the postwar \"F\" section, and a
contractor could not be found to turn rough ideas into specifications
and hardware. Specifically, IBM was more than hesitant to accept the
responsibility for the Sled program.

(T0//0I) IBM had been a good friend to the SIS, and so many of its
bright engineers had learned ofcodebreaking techniques during the war
that IBM had seemed the logical choice to turn the \"reconfigurable\"
idea into innovative machinery. There was also a factor of technological
continuity. IBM had created the NC and relaybox devices that were to be
paralleled in electronic form, and it was the manufacturer of the only
efficient equipment for the cards that had become the standard
\"memory\" in the tabulator rooms at both agencies.

(T0//0I) IBM was such a clear choice that it seemed to have been the
only one thought of by the SIS group advocating the Sled architecture.
But IBM was not in the mood to take on such work after the war. Its
management was not even extending a welcome to the requests from the
Bureau of Ships for more NC machines including a critically needed one
to record punch card data onto microfilm and then, if desired, reverse
the process

50

(3Ki//GI) IBM\'s rejection of the army and navy\'s overtures created
intense shock at the SIS. The army\'s men almost felt betrayed. They
could make no progress towards a \"Sled.\" The tensions between the
SIGINT agencies and IBM were quite evident by early 1947. Even OP-20-G
had become alienated. It had become tired of having to bend to the whims
of a single supplier and was willing to spend extra monies on machines,
training, and support to gain more bargaining power. It was giving very
serious consideration to setting up a processing center based on the
products of IBM\'s competitor, Remington-Rand.

£ES-) The army\'s machine group was certainly losing patience. It helped
draft a protest to the \"brass\" about IBM\'s lack of cooperation, 51
and some rather direct words reached Tom Watson. As a result, there was
more cooperation. In 1947 IBM\'s management made sure that ex-members of
the agencies who had returned to the corporation were assigned as
liaison officers.

\(8) Men such as James Green and Stephen Dunwell began to do much to
restore harmonious relations. They arranged little favors such as having
IBM replace the frequently wornout parts of the SIS keypunches at no
cost to the government. The cryptoagencies were the only ones at the
time to do extensive binary punching. That wore out the punches and die
blocks in weeks, rather than in the years that were typical in business
data centers.





\@d Green and Dunwell helped keep \"F\" informed of new technological
options. They made sure that \"G\" and the SIS were the first to know
about such important IBM advances as its 604 electronic multiplier and
its very hush-hush line of new tabulators. They did more than pass
information from IBM to the codebreakers; they began to act as advocates
for SIS and \"G.\"52 They met with IBM management and argued that the
company would benefit from the Sled research. 53

(TS//SI) But it was not until the summer of 1948 that IBM agreed to take
on the extensive Sled project.54 Then it was not until that fall that
the first specific designs began to receive approval.

(T8//SI) Meanwhile, the frustrations at the SIS had grown to such a
level and the need for a Comparator for baudot problems became so
pressing that the in-house engineers began designing an emergency
version of a Sled. At first called a \"tape-comparer,\" the machine
emerged in 1948 as a rather crude jury-rigged machine.

But it worked and it evolved step by step into the Connie Comparators of
the 1950s. They never became as flexible as Sled; but they were seen by
their sponsors as general-purpose comparators. 55

(TS//SI) While the Connie precursor was being constructed, IBM acquired
a secure building in Vestal, New York, to work on Sled. IBM sent some of
its best men to help with the project, including a future company
president, B. O. Evans. 56

(TS//SI) Unfortunately, just then, long-term goals had to be set aside,
at least for a time. A cryptoemergency arose. In response, a very
stripped-down version of Sled, with the appropriate name, Skate, was
hurriedly produced and rushed to Washington in 1949 to try to unravel an
intransigent jsystem.57 After a relatively

long shakedown cruise, Skate was put to work as a primitive electronic
version of a numeric-only Slide-Run machine. It was soon followed by a
more advanced copy, which cost twice as much as the first, over
\$500,000. 58



TS) Sled


P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)



£B//0frThe Skates were electronic advances, but costly ones in terms of
dollars and manpower diverted from the Sled ideal. That upset one of the
major figures in the agency who supported the Sled architecture, Albert
Highley. He knew from first-hand experience of the need for a ubiquitous
device on the machine room floor. His belief in a quickly convertible
architecture was perhaps reinforced by the Skate experience: By the time
the machine became fully operational, the original target had
disappeared.

fTST Highley became worried that Sled would never be turned into
hardware. As a result, he and his associate Ray Bowman began to apply
new pressures on the company. Sled was finally born, but that was eight
years after Leo Rosen had put forward the general outlines of such a
machine and a year after the SIS and OP-20-G had been merged into the
new organization, the National Security Agency. 59

(TB//8I) What finally arrived in Washington in the first half of 1953
were two copies of a custom-made machine whose basic design stood, for
more than two decades, as a tempting alternative to the general-purpose
computers. The Sleds did not achieve all that had been hoped for in 1945
when the \"reconfigurable\" design had first appeared, and they were
more expensive than thought. But they were impressive.

(T0//9I) The two copies cost a third more than Madame X,but that was not
much more than the previous Skate \"pilot\" models had cost.60 And they
were inspirations to those who favored a special cryptanalytic
architecture.

£P&//\$f) The Sleds depended upon highspeed electromechanical tabulator
equipment for their input and output, but they were not retrogressions.
The card reading and punching equipment was used because so much of the
information that was to be processed was already in card form and
because printers of the time

were too slow to keep up with the electronics that had been developed.

(TS//SI) The Sleds called upon the best largescale memory technology
ofthe era, magnetic drums. For the super-fast processes of offsetting
messages, they used advanced delay-line systems.

pRi//Si) The Sleds were built of hardwired function \"boxes\" with very
advanced circuitry. Although they did not span the full range of
cryptanalytic functions, those that were included gave Sled power over a
wide range of cryptanalytic problems.61 Critical to Sled was its type of
\"programs,\" a combination of plugboards and electronic matrices. They
allowed instant switching and concurrent processing.

G¥\$rff%T) The hardwired functions, the fast memories, and the use of
plugboard and electronic matrix programs were augmented bythe ability to
have much parallel processing. But with or without parallelism, Sled\'s
speed was impressive. For example, it could make 30,000,000 comparisons
a second if desired In contrast, the mid-i940s NCR-Gray Comparators
worked in the range of hundreds per second.

fflS//Sfr) Sled could be used as an IC machine, a crib-dragger,
awired-wheel machine analyzer and analog, a statistical threshold
tester, and much more. And it could be used for alphabetic as well as
numeric data.

CES//3f) One reason for its wide abilities was its memory systems. Its
magnetic drum held a significant amount of data for the time, 48,000
characters. Its delay lines and special circuits which could \"precess\"
(offset) two messages made it a very fast comparator and crib-dragger.
Sled also outdistanced the old Comparators because of its thirty-two
counters and five accumulators.

(T0//0E) Its electronic weighting circuits made it a very efficient
version of a plaintext




recognition machine, and its circuits for statistical evaluation also
helped in the several modes of IC analysis. Its \"recognition unit\"
made it a fast slide-run machine, and it was a very, very rapid
\"locator.\" Its two large matrices aided it when it was used to
decipher systems, including Enigmalike ones.

ffS//S4j Although the Sleds were honored because of their slide-run
\"recognition\" abilities, a clever engineer could make them perform a
broad range of functions. One routine made the testing of the suspected
reuse of key on a major system a routine matter.

(T8//8I) For example, 3,000 ten-group portions of key had been
recovered, and it was desired to see if any of them had been used on the
messages that continued to flow in. To do that, all the groups had to be
applied to the messages and the resulting text checked to see which, if
any, of the keys produced a significant percentage of known code groups.
Sled was able to test the 3,000 suspected keys against ten cipher groups
in just fourteen seconds. 6z

CTS//SI) \"Programming\" Sled was an art, with the programs looking more
like engineering timing diagrams than the instructions for a digital
computer.63 Despite that, Sled gained so much loyalty that the first
ones were cloned in a superfast transistor version by the late 1950s. As
we will see, a grand elaboration was proposed under the mid-1950s NSA
Farmer program. 64

\(U) Faith and an Institution; the Chance to

Begin an ERA

GES//M) OP-20-G had its \"reconfigurable\" machine working some four
years before the Sleds.55 The reason for the earlier appearance was not
because of more engineering genius within the navy; it was because of
different postwar institutional arrangements.

\(U) As the war was winding down, OP-20-G and the SIS knew they would be
stripped of men and resources. The situation looked bleak. Rosen\'s
\"F\" branch was in jeopardy, and Engstrom\'s \"M\" and the NCML faced
extinction. The Bureau of Ships showed signs of tiring of the near
autonomous NCML, and \"M\" had its own special problems because of navy
personnel rules. Holding onto its many exceptional scientists and
engineers was an especially difficult and pressing problem. Without
them, little progress could be made on methods or machines. There were
no cryptanalytic think tanks, and all the private computing machine
contractors made no effort to hide that they were tired of government
work. As threatening, in 1945 there was no electronic computer industry,
and there was little indication that one would emerge.

\(U) Friedman lobbied the army to maintain as many civilian slots as
possible, and he tried to create a joint machine development center with
OP20-G, but he had to settle for a small group in the SIS that could
direct and oversee established contractors.66 Wenger sought much more.
Rejecting the suggestions for ajoint army-navy program, but later being
forced to accept ajoint board that sought to coordinate programs and
targets, he began an independent search for a practical solution. 67

\(U) After some initial failures, things began to fall into place. The
secretary ofthe navy took great pride in OP-20-G\'s achievements, and
the Chief of Naval Operations had become an ally.68 The Office ofthe
Chief of Naval Operations helped overcome any objections from the
bureau, and the NCML\'s life was extended, at least for a time. Some
postwar funding seemed more than a possibility.

£TS//gf) Wenger formed anin-house RAM panel to take advantage of that
and to develop the technical arguments he would need to fend off any
major threats to his automation program. 69





\(U) In late summer 1945 a \$500,000, oneyear development contract was
awarded to NCML-NCR. It included funds to work on a new general-purpose
Comparator. Wenger underscored the point that the United States could
never again expect to have the time to make and correct fundamental
mistakes as it had during World War II. He hammered at two other points:
The traditional division between operational and bureau powers would ill
serve a modern navy, and only a continuation of something like the
cooperative relations between \"M\" group, NCR, and NCML could save
naval cryptanalysis. 70

\(U) He was given assurances that OP-20-G would be allowed its own
program and was told that navy money would be made available for
continuous machine development. Then Wenger received the wonderful news
of the establishment of Monogram, a long-term program to continue
upgrading communications intelligence equipment and methods. Hooper\'s
mid-i930s plan for naval communications and for linking science to the
navy appeared to have finally been appreciated.

\(U) Under project Monogram, every relevant research project was placed
within one integrated program. Radio research, the mathematics of
cryptanalysis, and even electronic explorations relevant to the
gathering and analysis of signals were to be subject to its generosity.
Millions of dollars, it was pledged, would be allocated for both
research and advanced development projects

71

\(U) More than money was promised. There was a strong hint of autonomy
for \"G.\" It would be allowed to direct its own work, free from the
Office ofNaval Research, the Naval Research Laboratory, the naval
electronics laboratories and, to a very great degree, the Bureau of
Ships. Although the other navy agencies continued the battle to control
\"G\'s\" \"turf,\" the naval Rapid Machine program had a future. 72

\(U) In late 1944 Wenger put Howard Engstrom, Ralph Meader, John Howard
and another of the bright navy engineers, Bill Norris, to work on
Hooper\'s suggestions.73 They proposed what they thought was a way to
permanently link science and innovation to the navy. It was anew version
of Hooper\'s post-World War I RCA. In 1945 Wenger\'s men recommended
creating the private, for-profit, National Electronics Laboratory. The
company was to be staffed by the talented men from OP-20-G and the other
advanced science agencies in the navy. 74

\(U) Wenger approved the idea, envisioning a firm that would devote
itself to navy communications problems,75 ranging from mathematical
cryptanalysis to the physics of radio.

\(U) The navy\'s legal experts gave the green light to\"M\'s\" officers,
such as Engstrom and Norris, having an interest in the private company.
Most ofthe \"M\" engineering team, including Howard, Coombs, and
Steinhardt agreed to join, but those who had been IBM employees decided
to return to their old company. Joe Desch and his men also opted to stay
with their firm, NCR. 76

\(U) Soon, however, everything seemed to be falling apart. America\'s old
scientific organizations rejected them. Rockefeller Foundation also
thought America had enough research institutions. A sponsor could not be
found, and the situation became critical. At the end of 1945 Wenger had
his new research agenda and had promises of contracts, but he had no
idea of where to find the men to build a full electronic Super Bombe, a
new version of Mike, his grand \"reconfigurable\" Comparator, or even a
viable punch for the old Comparators and the Copperheads. 77

\(U) A savior, at least a minimal version of one, finally appeared and
turned Wenger\'s failing dream into the new company, Engineering
Research Associates. But even the investment banker, entrepreneur, and
old friend ofthe navy, John Parker, could not piece together truly ade




EG. 3.3(h)(2) P.L. 86-36


quate funding. He could not even locate the new company hear OP-20-G.
The proposed research arm of \"G\" had to move to Minnesota. \'8 Coming
in contact with the Engstrom-Norris group through mutual friends in the
military,79 Parker was persuaded that a private version of the NCML-NCR
could succeed. He agreed to gather minimal financing, to help with
business matters, and to set the new company up in his old factory in
St. Paul, Minnesota.

\(U) ERA immediately gained the navy\'s approval, and it immediately won
OP-20-G\'s big research contract.80 In return \"G\" expected ERA to be a
\"captive\" of the navy.

\(U) It also won an important friend, OP-20\'s Louis Tordella. One of the
young officers who decided to stay in\"G\" after the war, Tordella would
become one of NSA\'s most dynamic leaders. In 1946 he began supervising
the ERA contracts and acted as a general liaison with the company.
Perhaps because of his interaction with the ERA engineers and
mathematicians, Tordella became one of the future NSA\'s most energetic
supporters of high technology as well as one of the most influential
figures in the history of American intelligence gathering. 81


\(U) A Bright Hope for Hooper\'s Dreams

OfSffST) By mid-1946 ERA had abroad contract with \"G,\" one that gave
it the freedom Bush had sought in the 1930s. Its men were happy with
competitive salaries, stock in the company, and the chance to do cutting
edge work in computers, communications, and operations analysis. There
were indications that ERA might also become a think tank and a center
for advanced mathematical research.Those efforts, led by C. B. Tompkins,
were coordinated with the research of several of \"G\'s\" alumni who had
returned to teach at such prestigious institutions as Harvard and the
University of Illinois. They did contract work on topics such asl land
the behavior of

binary systems.82 Wenger had a small but effective cadre within OP-20-G
to manage his technology program. Joseph Eachus, Howard Campaigne, and
James T. Pendergrass were topflight young scientists who appreciated the
role of mathematics and computers in cryptanalysis. They helped Wenger
set up a board to coordinate the RAM program with the needs of the
cryptanalysts. 83

\(U) Most importantly, ERA was launched on the mission of creating a
multipurpose cryptana

  -------------- ---------------------- --- --- --- -- --
                                        j   w   1      
  -,\' ijflflj                                         
                 \^\^B\^B\'\^\^\^B\^B                  
  -------------- ---------------------- --- --- --- -- --

\(U) Icuis Torctella

\(U) Joe Eachus






\(U) Golcberg

lytic computer.84 But ERA did not start its career with a leap into
fully digital electronic computing. It began with an attempt to build
the navy\'s version of Sled.

\(U) The Grand Machine of Its Time, the New Comparator

\(U) The hopes for a single grand cryptanalytic machine had been boiling
up at OP-20-G since 1944. But it took more than a year after Japan\'s
surrender before the outlines of the machine called Goldberg got the
financial nod from the Bureau of Ships.85 Joe Eachus had explored
possible technologies and sketched ideas which he passed onto his old
friends who had joined ERA.86 All types of memory media, including
microfilm, were investigated, as were new tubes and circuit designs.

\(U) At ERA the \"reconfigurable\" general-purpose Comparator Goldberg
began as more of a research than a development project. Many of
Goldberg\'s components were in advanced stages within its first year,
but the machine was not delivered until late 1949, more than a year
behind its production schedule, and two and one-half

behind the hopes of its original planners.87 Even more time was needed
to smooth over its operations. ERA was not finished with the machine
until 1951.m Goldberg ended up much more of a special-purpose machine
than had been intended. It did not even become a fully reconfigurable
computer. Operational needs pushed it to becoming an elaboration on the
early Comparators, but one targeted at the new teletype-encryption
devices.

\(U) Goldberg took photoelectric sensing and paper tape scanning to new
technical heights. Very fast tape drives were completed by 1947,
allowing as many as four tapes to be run on top of each other. The
drives ran the tapes at more than six times the speed of the older
devices and were able to offset the tapes for IC testing without slowing
the machine. Avery complex and precise scanner was developed which
included the photocells and circuits to sense each of the seven data and
three control positions in each row on a tape

\*\>

\(U) Goldberg was also an example of how much electronics had matured
since 1945 and how the emergence of new components could undermine
investments in the development of




early technologies. Almost as soon as they were developed, the new tape
systems were abandoned in favor of a series of emerging technologies.

CE3//SI) The first temptation that pulled attention away from tape or
film was electrostatic storage. For a time it was thought that Goldberg
was to have special television-like tubes and thus, a \"random
memory.\"90 But when RCA and others were unable to make such systems
operational, a \"second best\" technology was selected for Goldberg, the
magnetic drum.

\(U) Goldberg was treated to the slower but more tractable magnetic drum
memory. The system included delay lines and sophisticated circuitry that
allowed the tracks of information on the drums to be offset in the same
way that Bush\'s earlier Comparators had slid one tape over another.

9»

\(U) Goldberg was given one of the first magnetic drums in the world, and
\"firsts\" always have problems. It took several years of effort to make
the new technology behave. Even in mid-1949 there were problems with the
huge drums on Goldberg.

£TS//SI) Much more than the drum was innovative. Goldberg\'s central
cabinets were very impressive. They contained more than 7,000 tubes
reflecting the complexity of its digital circuits. Going beyond the
state ofthe art led Goldberg into trouble. Atone point in its
construction the majority ofthe tube sockets in the machine had to be
replaced. 92

C5S//SR But once in operation, Goldberg was able to perform many
different cryptanalytic functions through plugboard \"programs.\" That
helped fulfill some of its designer\'s hopes that it could be a
\"reconfigurable\" machine. 93

(0//0I) Goldberg could do anything that Mike or Copperhead or the old
Comparator had done during the war and much, much more. It could

perform so many standard functions that its \"specialized\" architecture
seemed more suited to cryptanalytic needs than the proposed
generalpurpose programmed computers.

(S//8f) It performed frequency counts, IC tests, round robin searches,
crib dragging, wheel stripping, roughness tests and, among other
functions, weighted calculations. It had an advanced translation system
for baud signals and an electronic 36 x 36 matrix that imitated, if
desired, a wired wheel.9\* It also had a sophisticated threshold circuit
that eliminated the \"always print\" feature of Bush\'s earlier machine,
thus saving much run time and analyst\'s attention.

(St And Goldberg was fast, although not as rapid as the later Sled. When
Goldberg was in top shape, it made 20,000 serial comparisons a second.
That was 250 times the rate of Bush\'s 70mm Comparator.9S

(j8//3\'0 Its thirty-six decimal (ring) counting circuits allowed deep
statistical analysis. In addition, it had banks of rectifiers for
short-term fast memory, which aided the special circuits used to
calculate the IC statistics.

63\) The Goldberg work led to advances in the design and use of magnetic
technology despite its drums sometimes being taken off to serve the
emergency needs. Besides its contributions to the mechanics and
electronics of drum memory, Goldberg incorporated a unique way of using
its drums. They were used as \"buffers.\" To speed processing, while one
drum was providing data for calculations, the other was loaded with data
from the tapes. 96

(T3//3I) Although it was late incoming, Goldberg was the
state-of-the-art \"reconfigurable\" Comparator. Contemporaries thought
the more than 8250,000 spent on it was a very wise investment,
worthwhile enough to think of





replacing the slow and sometimes troublesome drums with a massive
electronic memory. 97

(U//FQUO) However, because of its longdelayed and sometimes painful
delivery, it seemed best not to build any more of the \"G\" designed
general-purpose \"comparators.\" The contract for a second machine was
canceled. The progress on the general-purpose computer, Atlas, and the
old SIS group\'s faith in the Skate-Sled multipurpose machine project at
IBM indicated that the Comparators had outstayed their welcome.

CB0//Or) However, the engineers at ERA and NSA learned a great deal from
its development and its perhaps four years of service. They transferred
much of its technology to other machines, including along line of
limited comparator-like special-purpose devices that were begun in the
late 1940s and early 1950s. The tape-based Robins and Connies and the
ambitious delay-line Vivians and Delias took much from Goldberg.\"

\(U) Meanwhile, a Last Chance for Microfilm

(TS//SI) Although the engineers at ERA had decided microfilm was
inappropriate for Goldberg, there were many in \"G\" and the SIS who
continued to have faith in the future of Bush\'s solution to the mass
memory problem. While the navy had some engineers who saw Icky and Hypo
as just the beginnings of a major postwar microfilm program, it was an
army group that had the grandest postwar visions for film RAMs.
Encouraged by the arrival of its microfilm plus electronic-counter
machine in late 1944 and the about-to-be-completed 5202 Comparator for
the Tunny problem, \"F\" wanted to order a whole series of machines from
Eastman. Each would perform one of the major cryptanalytic functions. 100
The ideas were attractive because film continued to be a much higher
volume memory than magnetic devices. Drive speeds did not erase the
difference. In 1949 microfilm data could be

read in at five times the speed of data on magnetic drums.1C1

Cny/Ofr) The postwar SIS was not allowed to launch the ambitious film
RAM program, and it was unable to have Eastman-Kodak serve as an ongoing
resource. But the SIS\'s film advocates did begin a project to do the
necessary research and build an upgraded version of the ambitious 5202.
Shortly after the war it hired several small electronics companies to
explore all the possibilities. One, Hogan Laboratories, had a promising
design. A contract was let, and the SIS would have a very advanced film
Comparator before the end of the decade. 102

(TG//0f7 Those who continued to see the future of OP-20-G in terms of
microfilm received some funding. With a rather handsome allocation in
hand, they eventually convinced Eastman to do more than complete World
War II\'s Ambers. In 1947 Eastman accepted a contract to begin to
explore possibilities for a new Hypo and a new Icky. It would take quite
a while for Eastman to deliver the new versions, but in 1947 film again
seemed to have at least the possibility of a rebirth at \"G.\"103 There
was even some thought of having the Eastman group under Tyler build
alightbased bombe and a new electronic rotor bank. As promising was an
exploration of a grand idea for a huge new comparator using large
photographic plates or drums with as many as 10,000 tiny holes per
square inch. As the plates could be aligned over each other in one-tenth
of a second, a light-based machine to attack the new teletype encryption
machines seemed within reach. 104

\(U) Finally, the Electronic Bombe

(T0//6I) In 1947 there was even more that gave indications that the
cryptanalytic and technological triumphs of World War II would con

against the high-level systemsj\_

«f

Jsystems allowing the engineers at \"G\" and

tinue. Most important was the growing success

against the high-level systems\]

Enough had been learned about several of the

\]



P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)


tv-i,. 8 6-36 E0 t.at-h) (2)


t

new versions of the Purple relay devices (now

the SIS to bull

machines. The especially efficient because of a new. IBM relay
technology) were given the names of less intrusive colors, such as Tan
and Pink.

ectro

(TO//0I) There was also a series of e

mechanical analytic machines for the 1

problem. The small machines built by the inhbuse engineers were also
given \"softer\" names \\than those used for similar machines of World
War II. The Stork was one of many helpful devices used directly by the
cryptanalysts. 105

jar

\' (TC//8I) Achievements against the get went beyond tabletop relay
boxes. Perhaps the first operating machine to use a magnetic drum was
constructed as a crib-dragger to attack the very\\ very important
on-line encryption device the\] used for much of their top ech

elon traffic. Beginning work in early 1948, and using magnetic drums
taken from Goldbeig, ERA finished the first of several Demons in
October. Although the Demons had many relays and plugboards, they had
electronic components and the circuitry needed to search for
high-frequency clear groups. Follow-on models were flexible enough to be
used against several targets.

0TS//BI) The idea behind the Demon attack was clever. A large number of
cribs were applied to one message of a pair determined to have to been
produced by the. same key through IC and similar analyses. The derived
key from the first crib-plain match was applied to the other message.
Then, to See if true key had been found, the result was looked up in the
memory, which contained known high-frequency groups. 106

(TS//SI) More thrilling for the machine builders was the chance to at
last construct a full electronic Bombe. The explorations ofthe
electronic matrices and the growing knowledge ofthe rotor-based,
on-lincj\_ \"leneryptor

ect.107 It was one ofERA\'s great challenges because Hiawatha might cost
\$1,000,000 and call for 40,000 tubes and because ERA\'s engineers hoped
they could construct and design it so that it could attack more than one
teletype encfyptor.

£PS//0B Hiawatha was only a beginning. To

cover the entire spectrum oj devices, \"G\"

led to the appropriately named Hiawatha proj

began the Ophis project. Its first goal was another electronic rotor,
one for an attack on the mysterious Albatross machine. Albatross was
thought to be like Germany\'s wired-rotor Green Enigma ofWorld War II.
The SIS and \"G\" hoped that Ophis\' long-term result would be a general
wiredwheel Bombe that would be more powerful than Hiawatha. 108

(TS//-6f) There were even greater and more exciting engineering
challenges. By the time Hiawatha was conceived, both ofthe American
cryptanalytic agencies were joining the race to complete the first
modern \"von Neumann\" type of computer.

\(U) Notes

l-ffS//») NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"ANCIB Minutes, abstract of,\" 1955.
This also states that the U.S. was much more technically advanced than
the British. The only edge the British had, it stated, was in
\"collateral\" information. (TS//89 NSA CCH Series XII Z, draft copies
of Michael L. Peterson, \'The Bourbon Problem,\" indicates that early
British successes against Russian cipher machines and their ability to
intercept and process non-Morse transmissions were critical to
convincing die American agencies to extend the World War II cooperation
and formalize it in the BRUSA agreement. (¥8/7\*1) NSA CCH Series XII
Zand AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe, \"Historical Study of COMINT
Production, 1046-1949,\" April 1957.

2\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Procurement ofGeheimeschreiber
Equipment from British,\" J.N. Wenger, OP-20-G, 14 August 1945

3.4K-) NSA AHA ACC 78098, \"Monogram Report, Part IV, Field Research,\"
is useful on multiplex needs.





P.L. 86-36

4\. (¥S) On IBM\'s reluctance to take on any work after the war and even
into 1947, (¥9} NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM
Panel Reports,\" 1945-1949.

5\. (U) By the 1950s the physics community would seek an alternative to
the classic computer architecture as the demand for increased computing
power escalated. But in the 1940s the codebreakers took the lead in
seeking a different type of electronic computer.

6.(¥S-) NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1, \"Machines in the Service of
Cryptanalysis,\" 28 September 1954.

7.(TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe,
\"Historical Study of COMINT Production, 1946-1949,\" April 1957.

8.(T0//0IJ NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe,
\"Historical Study of COMINT Production, 1946-1949,\" April 1957,173.

9\. f¥S) The hopes of the army cryptanalysts were expressed in a long
memorandum from Frank Rowlett to the commander at Arlington Hall in
mid-1945, (3«) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B. Rowlett, \"RAM in Future
Cryptanalysis,\" 3 May 1945. Note, however, that his vision was less far
reaching than those expressed inWenger\'s plans for RAMs atOP-20-G. For
example, see (28) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO to Chief Bureau of Ships,
\"Communications Intelligence: Research and Development,\" 21 December
1945, and, Wenger toEachus, \"Analytical Machinery Panel,\" 31 October
1946.

10\. (¥9//ST) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe,
\"Historical Study of COMINT Production, 1946-1949,\" April 1957.

11\. (TS//SI) CFS3 NSA CCH Series VI.1.8, \"Martini,\" circa 1947-
Onlnitram, (¥9) NSA CCH Series XII Z,J. F.Beatty, \"Martini
(Longfellow),\" OP-20, 1947. The old Japanese analogs, such as Python,
contributed their parts to the anti-Soviet cause. See also the army\'s
Tan analog of the Longfellow machine. Exciting sources on the progress
against one of the Soviet\'s most sophisticated and important cipher
machines are found in (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Longfellow,
History of,\" N-31 to 20-L, June 1948.

12\. erS//Si) (TS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne, \"Summary of
War Diary September

1946,\" 7 October 1946. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne
to 20-34 L, \"Longfellow, History of.\" June 1948. (W€) NSA CCH Series
V.I.1.20, \"Longfellow, Machine Breaking, 1947-\" (TS//SI) \_NSA CCH
Series XII Z,\"0P-20-G, /\'History of NavyAttack on Longfellow,\" 14
December 1949.

13\. (TS//ST) On the frustrations caused by the Soviet I \| (T0//0I) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.\"
One large set of comparators, the Robins, was built just for the problem
but achieved little. (-TS//S\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z,AFSA-2l \"Summary
of the Early Operation of the Robin Machinery,\" 19 May 1951.

14\. CES//Sfr) When the world situation began to unravel in the late
1940s, not enough was known about some of the more important Soviet
machines to allow a fast technological solution such as the Bombe
program of World War II. The United States did not know enough about the
wired-wheel Albatross machine, for example, to allow the construction of
a massive analog-analytic machine like the Bombe. (TS\#») NSA AHA ACC
18669, AFSA-02, \"Request for establishment of Comparator Project
(Albatross),\" 6 June 1950.

15\. (IS\#SI) Oliver R. Kirby, \"The Origins of the Soviet Problem: A
Personal View,\" Cryptologic Quarterly, Vol. 11 \#4 (Winter 1992),
51-58, gives an insight into the SIS\' fears about being ordered not to
pursue the Soviet problem. (TS//0I) The series of histories by CCH
historian Michael L Peterson published in Cryptologic Quarterly,
1994-95, shows the navy was working under the same fears.

16\. CES\#8\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948, provides a summary of
the devices planned at the end of the war.

17\. CES//8\*) OP-20-G invested much in the innovative Hecate machine,
which was in the planning stage by the end of the war. It is described
below as is a more general-purpose device, Alcatraz, which was at first
targeted at\| ). (TQ//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z,AFSA-35iB, \"The Use of
Hecate in

:

\] October 1950.

18\. (TS//0I) On Hecate, (SS} NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1, \"Machines
in the Service of



EO 3.3(h)(2) P.L. 86-36



Cryptanalysis,\" 28 September 1954. pEfl//8i) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Mechanization in Support of Comint, Phase II,\" circa 1955. \@S) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers; A Historical
Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 198 (Hogan). And there seemed no
need to rush its development and construction.

19\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948, states that 32 Bombes, 2
Grandads and 4 Duennas were still available as of 1-31-49. The
Autoscritcher was retired in 1945.

20\. (U) A useful overview of the Hagelin enterprise and influence is
Boris C. Hagelin, David Kahn (ed.), \'The Story of the Hagelin
Cryptos,\" Cryptologia, XVII \# 3 (July 1994), 204-242.

22\. (¥8) NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R. Steinhardt, \"Digraph Counter,
Improved, Conference On,\" 11 July

1945

23\. CTO//0I) Oliver R. Kirby, \"The Origins of the Soviet Problem; A
Personal View,\" Cryptologic Quarterly, Vol. 11 \#4 (Winter 1992),
51-58. Note that in 1945 and 1946 even the president was unsure of the
relationship between the United States and the Soviets and argued
against reading their messages

24\. (TS\#Sfl f»} NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt, \"Digraph
Counter, Improved, Conference On,\" 11 July 1945, (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of Computers,\" nd. {XS)\> NSA
CCH Series XII Z, The System I

(Alcatraz),\" AFSA-35lBm circa 1950. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"ERA Task
\#7 Alcatraz,\" circa 1949. 4IS} NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
\"Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,\" 1945-1949- There is some confusion
in the records over the production of a Baby Alcatraz. The best judgment
seems to be that when the

proposed size of machine was reduced, it was called, by some, \"Baby,\"
and that only one machine was built.

25\. (C//69 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Sam Snyder, \"Draft Document,
Pre-Computer Machines in Support of Cryptanalysis,\" circa 2 February
1978.

26\. {\$) NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 12, \"Analytic Machinery
Principles,\" September, 1949, 37. (TB//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy
H. Wheatley. \"Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953. (U) Charles
J.Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers, (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986),
464.

27\. (X8//SI) (ft NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 12, \"Analytic
Machinery Principles,\" September, 1949, 37. (TG//0r) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953. (U)
Charles J. Bashe et al., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT
Press, 1986), 46. NSA\'s precursors acquired at least the next and more
powerful version of the 603, the 604, and put it to use with tabulators
stripping additives.

28\. CS\#SI} (U)) James W.Cortada, Historical Dictionary of Data
Processing: Technology (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987), 366. See also
the unpublished work on the early Remington-Rand machines by this
author.

29\. (SS//Sfj NSA CCH Series XIIZ, A M. Gleason, \"Inversion of Matrices
with O\'Malley,\" 1948.

30\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"Use of HECATE 1 1 Message
Placement,\" October

1950, and (T8//8I) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on
Ram Panel Meetings.\"

31\. ffg/ZS\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA \"MPRO Technical Reports,\" circa
1956.

32\. (W//89 NSA CCH Series XIIZ, A, M. Gleason, \"Inversion of Matrices
with O\'Malley,\" 1948.

33\. (m NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1, \"Machines in the Service of
Cryptanalysis,\" 28 September 1954.

34\. (WW) (Laconici Nocon) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F.Stahly, \"Fifty
Yeate of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985. (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XIIZ, \"Office of Computers, List of Computers,\" nd.

35- (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA-OH-07-83, Oral History Interview with
Beverly It; Chall, 2 May 1983



P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)



36\. erS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT,
Phase II,\"circa 1955

37\. (¥S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA, Contract Number Nobsr-42001,
\"Preliminary Report and Proposal, Task: Project Warlock,\" 9 June 1948.
(S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,ERA, \"Warlock Progress Reports, ERA Task 18,\"
21 November 1947 to 10 April

1951.

38\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd.

39\. ffS//8ft (Laconicj Nnnnn) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F.Stahly,
\"Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985. (IS\#H) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.\"
f\[5i34\]- W7W) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Fifty Years of the Soviet
Off-line Machine Cipher,\" 10 January 1989

40\. (Tfl//0ft NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA, Contract Number Nobsr-42001,
\"Preliminary Report and Proposal, Task: Project Warlock,\" 9 June 1948.
Warlock borrowed from the Whirlwind Project at MIT. But it seems to have
used a unique three-value logic for its weighing system to save tubes
and processing time.

41\. (T0//Si) Apparently, the rush of work in World War II led to the
Americans not gaining enough skills to make independent attacks on the
Tunny-like machines. P&fttt) NSA CCH Series XII Z, S-2733, \"Longfellow,
History of,\" by Howard Campaigne, June 1948. (IS//S\*)-Oliver R.Kifby,
\'The Origins of the Soviet Problem: A Personal View,\" Cryptologic
Quarterly, Vol. 11 \#4 (Winter 1992), 51-58. A list of priorities from
late 1947, after world events had put more pressure on the agencies,
still reflect the faith in a general-purpose machine. (-TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 17, \"Long Range Cryptanalytic Program for
Literal Systems,\" December 1947.

42\. (TS//SI) The philosophy oP\'reconfigurable\" machines and universal
components underwent several modifications during the era, but the goal
remained the same. For a later interpretation, (¥8} NSA CCH Series XII
X-MPRO, U.S. Cryptanalytic Research and Development Committee, \"Joint
Long Term Program for Research and Development in the Field of
Cryptanalytic Equipment,\" 21 July 1948.

43\. fFS\^&I) NSA AHA 36746, Engineering Research Associates, Inc.,
\"Proposal for An Electronic Rotor Program,\" 19 December 1946. On the
continued search by the navy for high-speed components for the matrix,
the Leo Project, which came to include the exploration of most basic
technologies, including saturable cores, @) NSA CCH Series XII Z,LEO:
progress Report, ERA Task \#11, 1 September 1947 1 October 1948. On the
army\'s extensive basic electronic research during the late 1940s,
(TS//SI) NSA CCH Series IV.C.2.14, ASA \"Annual Reports for the Fiscal
Year 1949, Vol. II, Research and Development Division,\" Washington, 30
June 1949. The amounts invested in such research indicate that the
SIGINT agencies must have played a significant role in pushing the
development of tubes and transistor technology.

44- (TS//W) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948, 9, shows that Sled
became a joint army-navy project with the Bureau of Ships managing the
contract. But the Sled concept seems to have originated at the SIS.

45\. (TS//SI) On the army plans, Rosen (T8C) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File
Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings;\" on the navy\'s (18) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers: A Historical
Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986, (Hogan); and on the
navy\'s participation in Sled 4S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
\"Conference on Slid(e)-Run Machine,\" 5 January 1946; (IS)-NSA AHA
36746, Engineering Research Associates, Inc., \"Proposal for An
Electronic Rotor Program,\" 19 December 1946; CES//SI) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, \"Joint Long Term Program (Old Planning Material, 1948-1949)
compiled by Doug Hogan.

46\. (TS//SI) Leo Rosen outlined his idea of a reconfigurable electronic
machine in fT\_S//Sf) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne
on Ram Panel Meetings.\"

47.4TS//Sft NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" Joint Research And Development Board Memoranda.

48\. (XS/fOfT NSA CCH Series XH Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings.





49- (Sffm NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard, \"Conference on
Slid(e)-Run Machine,\" 5 January 1946.

50\. (WtW) NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports,\" 1945-1949,

51\. fFS» NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports,\" 1945-1949.

52\. (S). On the 604, (S) NSA AHA ACC 8544, \"Memorandum for Members of
RAM Panel, New I. B. M. Tabulator,\" circa 1948-9.

53- (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, folder marked, Snyder, \"Precomputer
Comments,\" circa 1978, \"Possible Item of Interest.\"

54\. ff3//39 NSA CCH Series XII Z,

\"Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December
1948.

55\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, James L. Sapp, The Analytic
Machines,\" circa 1955. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.Wheatley,
\"Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953. £5S) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, Sam Snyder, draft copy of, \"Pre-Computer Machines in Support of
Cryptanalysis,\" circa February 1978.

56..0S7W NSA CCH Series XIK Snyder, Box 10, 10-27-77 Folder.

57\. (ST J.J. Eachus, \"SIGMAGE Threshold Control,\" 2 July 1946. & NSA
CCH Series XII Z, BuShips, \"Specifications Sled Navy Models CXOA and
CXNQ Block Diagrams,\" 1 October 1948. mffm) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December
1948. £ES} NSA AHA ACC 10842, Ray L. Bowman,\" Engineering Diary,\"circa
1945-1950.

58\. (S6//0fl On the Skates (Q NSA CCH Series XII Z, Descriptions of NSA
Early SPDs and Computers, as compiled from various NSA sources, and,
(C//CI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Herbert W. Worden, \"EDP Machine
History.\" Apparently both

in late 1948. See Michael L. Peterson, (T3//SI) \"Beyond Bourbon,\"
1948, 4- The Skates were flexible enough, however, to be used on other
problems.

59\. ffS\^mff NSA AHA ACC 10842, Ray L. Bowman, \"Engineering Diary,\"
circa 1945-1950.

60\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Samuel S. Snyder, \"Pre-Computer
Machines in Support of Cryptanalysis,\" draft, circa 16 February 1978,
IV-25. Offi\#H) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd.

61\. (T0//S1) The Sled was constructed of two large interconnected
cabinets; the term \"boxes\" is used for convenience.

62\. ffSjr NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1, \"Machines in the Service of
Cryptanalysis,\" 28 September 1954,10.

63\. Wf\$T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, James L. Sapp, \"The Analytic
Machines,\" circa 1955.

64..GW/SIT NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA, \"MPRO Technical Reports,\" circa
1956. The price tag was not inconsequential. The transistor version cost
approximately \$2,000,000.

65\. (T8//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, list of
Computers,\" nd. A pilot model of the proposed Sled, which was completed
to help with the Soviet problem, was Skate. It arrived in late 1949; the
version that was closer to the original grand intentions, Sled, was
delivered in early 1953.

66\. (U) Friedman sought a joint army-navy program, but the navy never
accepted the idea. NARA RG457, SRMA-011, \"Senior Staff Meeting Notes,\"
April 3,1945, \"Friedman\'s joint work suggestion,\" 174, 231, 321.
Samuel S.Snyder, \"Abner: The ASA Computer, Part 1: Design,\" NSA
Technical Journal, 25 (1980): 49. On turf battles among the services,
Louis Kruh, \"Army-Navy Collaboration for Cryptanalysis of Enemy
Systems,\" Cryptologia, 16 (1992): 145-164.

67\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Joint Long Term Program (Old
Planning Material, 1948-1949)\" compiled by Doug Hogan.

68\. CW-Robert William Love, Jr., The Chiefs of Naval Operations
(Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1980), 137-192.

69\. (Wf-m) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings.\"

70\. (U) NSA RAM File: August 21, 1945, \"Continuation and Development of
Communication Intelligence\"; Part II of Report to J. N. Wenger, Capt.
USN, \"Resume of the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World War II,\"
December 21, 1945, CNO toBoShips,



P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)



\"Continue to fund NCML\"; and March 21,1946, OP-20G \"History of
Formation of ERA.\"

71\. (U) NSA AHA ACC 40731A, SRMN-084, \"The Evolution of the Navy\'s
Cryptologic Organization.\" The importance and scope of Monogram for
advancing intercept capabilities and mathematics in cryptanalysis is
reflected in, (IS) NSA 40 AHA ACC 7808, \"Monogram Report,\" 29 November
1949. (XS). NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Report of the Second Computer Study
Group,\" as in NSA Technical Journal, XTX (Winter 1974), 21-61.

72\. £8) (U) NSA RAM File, December 20, 1945, \"ERA postwar research
plan,\" and July 20, 1946, Engstrom: BuShips,\"Use Naval laboratories,
not ERA\" ON the Bureau of Electronics attempts to control OP-20G\'s
part in Monogram, f¥9) NSA AHA ACC 7808, \"Monogram Report,\" 29
November 1949.

73\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-267, \"History of Engineering Research
Associates.\" NSA RAM File, September 12, 1947, \"Minutes ofOP-20-2
Research Committee Meeting.\"

74\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-267, \"History of Engineering Research
Associates.\" NSA RAM File, January 2,1945, Wenger OP-20-G to CNO,
\"Plan for ERA,\" and August 21, 1945, \"Continuation and Development of
Communication Intelligence \[ERA\].\"

75\. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-084, \"The Evolution of the Navy\'s Cryptologic
Organization,\" 15.

76\. (U) Bright mathematicians and physicists also joined the new
company. Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed ERA
Materials, ERA Personnel Summaries, circa 1946, and Engstrom to Norris,
September 11, 1946. The Staff of Engineering Research Associates,
High-Speed Computing Devices (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950). All
departments of the navy were concerned about how to continue their
advanced scientific work. U. S. Naval Administration in World War II,
War History of the Naval Research Laboratory, Guide No. 134, and Harvey
M.Sapolsky, Science and the Navy: The History of the Office of Naval
Research (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990).

77\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed ERA
Materials, Engstrom to Norris, September 11,1946. NSA RAM File, December
20,1945, \"ERA post war research plan,\" and December 21, 1945, CNO to
BUShips, \"Continue to fund NCML.\"

78\. (U) The Charles Babbage Institute holds many informative inter-views
with ERA founders.

79\. (U) Important was Nelson Talbott, the powerful Dayton business
executive.

80\. (U) Charles Babbage Institute, \"An Interview With James Henry
Wakelin, Jr.,\" OH 104, Conducted by Arthur Norberg, February 27, 1986.
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed Remington Rand /
ERA materials, ERA Minute books 1946. NARA RG457, SRH-267, \"History of
Engineering Research Associates,\" 6-7. NSA RAM file: March 8,1946, John
Parker to Secretary of the Navy, \"Plan for ERA\"; March 8,1946,
OP-20-G, \"List of research projects and secret ERA contract of
12-21-45\"; and March 21, 1946, OP-20-G \"History of Formation of ERA\"

81\. (U) On the expectations that ERA would be a strictly navy firm, (U)
NSA AHA ACC 40731A, SRMN084, \"The Evolution of the Navy\'s Cryptologic
Organization.\"

82\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948. A somewhat later but
very interesting project was concentrated on the mathematics of
sorting.-\^ NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA A. E. Roberts, \"An Experiment in
the Rearrangement of Data (Sweater),\" (Sorting, Nomad) 1 May 1950.

83\. PSftSfi NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948.

84\. (U) NSA RAM File, December 20, 1945, \"ERA postwar research plan.\"
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901, Yuter Papers, June 6,1946 to
July 28,

1946, ERA-NCML on \"Orion-Goldberg Project,\" and August 4-8, November
1-9, 1946, ERA reports \"OrionGoldberg, binary and analog magnetic
recording.\" Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed
Remington-Rand / ERA materials, August 17,1946. \"ERA salaries.\" NSA
RAM File: August 14,

1947, Bureau of Ships toERANCML \"Task contracts causing problems\";
June 3,1946, NCML to ERA, \"have your work approved\"; and July 22,
1946, CNO to Secretary of the Navy, \"Project Monogram.\"

85\. CES//83 NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings.\" OP-20-G had asked IBM to take on a long-term research
contract in 1945 and again in 1946, but was refused.





P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)

86\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901, Yuter Papers,
September 1946 November 1,1946 reports \"Orion-Goldberg, binary- and
analog magnetic recording.\"

87\. a&JJ&Pr NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948.\"

88\. (XS//ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. © NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Goldberg Progress Reports,\"
30 December 1947 through 10 April 1951. (»ef) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.\"

89\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901, Yuter Papers:
Goldberg Reports July-August, 1946; January i, 1947; and September
22,1947.

90\. (IS//flfr- NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948.

91\. £») NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports,\" 1945-1949, gives the date of the commitment to magnetic drums
as early 1947.

92\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,ffle folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports,\" 1945-1949.

93- CES\#S0 NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose
Computers: A Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986.

94\. m NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 12, \"Analytic Machinery
Principles,\" September 1949.

95\. (S\#SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Symbols with their meanings for
GOLDBERG programming,\" nd. On the speed of the 70mm Comparator,
(\*\*\$) NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1, \"Machines in the Service of
Cryptanalysis,\" 28 September 1954.

96.«§\*-NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 12, \"Analytic Machinery
Principles,\" September 194143

97\. ffS//\#r) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. On the drum problems,-\^ NSA CCH Series XIIZ,
\"Goldberg Progress Reports,\" 30 December 1947 through 10 April 1951.

98\. (U//E0U6) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, Sam Snyder, \"Draft Document,
Pre-Computer Machines in Support of Cryptanalysis,\" circa 2 February
1978, IV-15.

99\. fflfl//3i) (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901, Yuter
Papers, ERA, Goldberg Reports, July 1946, September 1946, and January
1,1947. On

Vivians, CES/\#9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of

Computers, List of Computers,\" nd. and their use v

lfffl//03 NSA CCH Series XII

Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT, Phase II,\" circa 1955.

100\. gF0//0i) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems.\" CP8) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"The Status of RAM,\" circa June 1945. {8} NSA AHA ACC
26373, SIS, \"Technical Paper, RAM,\" circa June 1945- 68) NSA AHA ACC
29373, SIS Chief \"F\' Branch, \"Request for RAM Equipment,\" 23 March
1945. &) NSA CCH Series XII Z.0P-20-G, \"SSA Proposal for 70mm Film I.C.
Machine,\" 8 June 1945.

101\. (S)JJSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 12, \"Analytic Machinery
Principles,\" September 1949.

102\. tf 3//MF NSA CCH Series IV.C.2.14, ASA, \"Annual Reports for the
Fiscal Year 1949, Vol. II, Research and Development Division,\"
Washington, 30 June 1949. (TS//SD NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of
Computers, List of Computers,\" nd.

103\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM
Panel Reports,\" 1945-1949. HYPO II was not delivered until 1952. There
was also a project to explore the possibilities of computer output
microfilm during the late 1940s. The Eastman contract was less than one
tenth of what was allocated to ERA, but it was appreciable. ffS\* NSA
CCH Series XII X-MPRO, U.S. Cryptanalytic Research and Development
Committee, \"Joint Long Term Program for Research and Development in the
Field of Cryptanalytic Equipment,\" 21 July 1948. (GffBf) NSA CCH Series
XII Z,H. H. Campaigne, \"Conference About Squinter,\" 15 November 1949.
(T0//8I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948.

104\. CEB\^m NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,\" and, (0) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H.H. Campaigne,
\"Conference About Squinter,\" 15 November 1949.

105\. (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary\'
Activities, RAM Report II,\" 21 December 1948,19.

106\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,ffle folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports,\" 1945-1949, and,


JORSECRETOCOMIMT/fREl TO USA) AU6, CAM, GEO, AMD NZUfld



\(S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA, \"Demon II Progress Reports,\" 15 July
1948 to April 1951.

107\. 0«7VSTJ NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948,\" states that Hiawatha
was begun on March 1,1948, only to face the disappearance of Longfellow
from the airwaves on April 11.

108\. (XS//S9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Longfellow, History of,\" N-31 to
20-L, June 1948. £¥S} NSA AHA ACC 8252, OP-20-G, \"Communications
Intelligence Research Plans, 1948,\" 7 April 1947. QES) NSA CCH Series
XII Z,file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,\" 1945-1949-
(TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications Supplementary
Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948.





Page 232 TflP acrpcT»prniiMT»PPl Tniirft Alirr PAN. ODH. AMD NZUflH



