Chapter 4 (U) Meeting the Crisis: Ultra and the Bombe

\(U) Looking Ahead - Ultra Saves RAM and OP-20-G Creates a Science
Company

\(U) The history ofOP-20-G\'s cryptanalytic machine program would have
been very different if Britain had had the power to read the German
U-boat messages during 1942. On the chance that its men could beat the
British to a reentry into the U-boat Enigma, OP-20-G was granted its
longsought Rapid Machine program and its own factory and workforce. But
the establishment of what became known as the Naval Computing Machine
Laboratory came at a price. Because the American navy had not attended
to the Enigma and because Hooper and Wenger\'s pleas for machine
development in the 1930s were not fully heeded, OP-20-G had to defer its
attempts to create advanced electronic computers for pure cryptanalysis.
To solve the \"E\" problem, the machine group spent most of its first
year and one-half, and much of the next two years, coaxing
electromechanical components into doing things never before expected of
them. The conglomeration of electrical, mechanical and electronic parts
called Bombes turned Engstrom\'s men away from solving the fundamental
problems associated with Bush\'s designs, and away from an exploration
of the possibilities of a general-purpose electronic machine.\*

(V)The \"E\" Machine

\(U) The Bombe was the example of the need for a technological retreat to
deal with a cryptologic emergency. Despite Germany\'s destruction during
World War I and the crippling burdens imposed on it under the peace, it
built a strong codemaking capability during the 1920s and 1930s. At the
center was the Enigma encryption

machine, the workhorse of its military communications networks.

\(U) The Enigma was a typewriter-size device that could be used in the
field as well as in an office. It was electromechanical and used
batteries to provide the electric current which passed through a series
of shifting transposition rotors (commutators) to yield an extremely
long encryption cycle. Physically, Enigma consisted of a keyboard to
enter letters, a cascade of moving wheels that scrambled their inputs, a
reversing wheel that sent the electrical impulses back through the
wheels, a plugboard that further mixed the letters, and a series of
lamps that showed the final result of the encryption.

\(U) The Germans felt safe because they calculated that even if the
wiring of the code wheels were known, it would take impossibly long for
an enemy to identify the particular \"key\" settings of a message. In
its early configuration, with just three of five available code wheels
being used and no plugboard, Enigma had over one million possible
settings.2

\(U) When the plugboard was added to the military versions, the Germans
felt even more confident. The possible combinations jumped into the
range of two hundred million million million! That made intellectually
blind attacks on the machine an impossibility.3

\(U) One World War II cryptanalyst explained why there was a critical
need for revolutionary methods, and machines which could reduce the
number of possible \"E\" settings that had to be examined, by stating:4
\"If every man, woman and child in the British Isles were given an
Enigma machine, they would have to try 3,000,000 pos





sibilities on each starting position on each wheel order and would work
their whole life to break one key.\"

\(U) The Germans constantly changed the \"E\" to make it stronger. They
enhanced the system by increasing the number of wheels to choose from.
By the end of the war, German codemen could choose from as many as nine
main scrambling wheels when selecting a setup for their machines. In
1942 the Atlantic U-boat system added a fourth wheel inside its
machines. Later in the war, the Germans made the machine more robust
when they changed the plugboard and attached the Uhr box. The Uhr added
another level of complexity by eliminating some of the cryptologic
weaknesses of the plugboards.

SCMtUStit M

WiMSVWi

irttKtft

::: {style="width: 31.673853390827126%;"}
:::

\(U) Qiigma

\(U) Perhaps most frightening to the Allies was the \"pluggable
reflector\" which appeared on some German air force and army networks
near the end of the war. It created more combinations to hunt through
than had the introduction of a fourth wheel.3

\(U) The Germans were particularly sensitive to a weakness in all
encryption systems, the vulnerability of internal indicators. Indicators
were the brief instructions in each transmission that told a recipient
how to set the remaining components of his Enigma, the ones not
specified in a network\'s instruction books. Unlike the keys specified
for all users in a network, indicators were selected by operators and
changed with each message. Unfortunately for the Germans, they found no
way to prevent their enemies from using those indicators to penetrate
some of the \"E\" networks. The exploitation of the indicators was one
of the most important ways that Poland\'s cryptanalysts entered the
Enigma systems in the early 1930s.

\(U) The Poles were helped by stolen documents and used many more
approaches than the attack based on the indicators.6

\(U) Only a Few Were Able and Willing to Tackle \"E\"

\(U) Poland created what Stanford Hooper and William Friedman yearned to
have in America: an office devoted to pure cryptanalysis. Poland\'s
codebreaking bureau was able to recruit several bright young
mathematicians who, as early as 1930, began to apply group theory and
other advanced mathematical and statistical techniques to the German
Enigma system. With the help of stolen documents provided by the French,
the Poles began to understand and then penetrate the Enigma. They

M6HT SOCMfS





were reading many German systems by the mid19308. By supplementing their
mathematical analyses with the weaknesses of some of the operational
uses of the Enigma, such as repeating the indicators for a message or
picking keys in a nonrandom way, the Poles were able to avoid using
brute force searches that tested every possible \"E\" setting. They even
learned how to avoid using data-heavy statistical analysis. A
significant and fundamental discovery by the Poles was that the
forbidding and seemingly impregnable plugboard was irrelevant in some
cryptologic contexts. The discovery about the plugboard reduced the
number of tests needed to identify an Enigma\'s setup by millions.

\(U) The Poles Automate Cryptanalysis in Their Special Way

\(U) The Polish group also called upon automation in the early 1930s.
Much work and genius went into the invention of an electromechanical
machine, the Cyclometer, which automatically generated all the patterns
produced by various Enigma settings. The Cyclometer was not a
statistical machine or a device that could lead to a modern computer,
however. It was an electromechanical rig that produced a card catalog so
analysts, in just a few minutes, could go from the indicators in a
message to the Enigma setup.

\(U) In 1938, to meet a change in the way the Enigma\'s settings were
communicated, the Poles invented their version of an electromechanical
automaton, the Bomba.7 The Bomba was a set of linked Enigma machines
that tested for the letter cycles produced by the setting indicators in
Enigma messages.

tS\^JOne explanation for the use of the strange name, Bomba, is based on
the mechanical crudeness of the first Polish machines. To save precious
construction time and parts, when the Bomba found a hit, a weight on the
side of the machine

was dislodged and dropped to the concrete floor with a very loud
\"bang.\"8

\(U) The special-purpose Bomba was based upon a negative logic and used a
special \"crib\" composed of the message indicators. The Bomba\'s goal
was to eliminate the wheel orders and wheel positions that could not
have produced the letter-to-letter cycles in an indicator.

\(U) The Poles had constructed six of the Bombes, one for each possible
wheel order. That was adequate when the Enigmas came with only three
encryption wheels to choose from. But just as the first Bombas were put
into operation, the Poles had to face an increase in the number of
Enigma wheels, then an alteration in the use of the \"E\" plugboard.
Those changes demanded ten times the number of Bombas for a timely
search. The Poles were too exhausted to produce so many additional
machines. Their attempt to reenter Enigma through new statistical and
hand methods was frustrated by a lack of manpower and time.9

\(U) Keeping the Bomba Secret for Too Long

\(U) When the invasion of Poland seemed imminent, and when the Warsaw
team could not sustain its automation efforts, the Poles started to pass
their secrets to their friends.10 It was not until late summer 1939,
when the Poles had to have help in producing more of their vital overlay
sheets and Bombas, that Britain and France were informed of how the
Polish men had been able to read Enigma messages.

CFS//SF) The British representatives were grateful for the information,
but they also were very upset that they had not been told the secrets
when they had met with the Poles in February 1939. Their anger almost
led to a break between the two sets ofcodebreakers. One high-level
British codeman, not realizing the Poles understood English, vented his
frustration by berating them while in their limousine. Fortunately, the





diplomatic skills of his countrymen calmed the Poles.\"

\(U) Despite the affront, the Poles gave the Englishmen copies of the
Enigmas they had reverse-engineered and told them of the many ways to
identify the various German Enigma radio networks. But on the eve of the
invasion of Poland, the Germans made several more shattering changes in
their Enigma systems, which made Britain\'s task nearly impossible.
After France was overrun, Britain was left with the responsibility for
making a new beginning against the Enigma.12 To exploit both her own
previous work and the gifts of the Poles, Britain expanded its
Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS) and established the now famous
Bletchley Park.

\(U) A Fresh Start against UE\"

\(U) Despite the belief among many British influentials that the German
code and cipher systems, especially their naval ones, would never be
broken, Britain made a significant commitment to cryptanalysis. \^

\(U) Teams of brilliant men and women were recruited from the
universities to work on the various Axis systems. Alan Turing was only
one of the Bletchley wonders who were recognized experts in mathematics
and logic.14 Under intense pressure, by 1940 he and others at GC&CS
began to create the many invaluable techniques and electrical devices
that eventually gave birth to the Ultra Secret. For example, the first
Bletchley version of its Bombe was in operation in early i940.The next
important configuration, with the ingenious diagonal board for the
critically needed simultaneous testing of plugboard settings, was
running by August. 15 That TuringWelchman Bombe of 1940 was a cousin,
but a very distant one, of the Polish Bomba.

\(U) Turing explored many varieties of possible solutions, hoping to find
one that would withstand changes in\"E\" and its usage. Although

actively seeking pure methods to attack the Enigma, Turing eventually
had to accept the use of a dependent and near brute force approach.\'6

\(U) At first he thought he had discovered a relatively pure method. In
1939 when he went to the naval section at Bletchley Park, Hut 8, Turing
sought a robust and universal means of attack. After learning as much as
possible about Enigma, he called on his knowledge of statistics and
probability. He arrived at a method quite like the one Wenger and Bush
had chosen for the Comparator, the Index of Coincidence, The name given
to his cluster of statistical methods was \"Banburismus.\"

■fPS-J-Turmg focused his statistical powers on the German naval systems
because they had been the most intransigent. He thought that if his
\"Banburismus\" methods proved of worth against them, they could be
generalized to all cipher machine systems.\'7 The general logic of
Banburismus was, like the IC, based on the statistical characteristics
of language. The goal of both approaches was also the same: to identify
messages that had been enciphered with the same \"key\" or machine
setting. Once such a \"depth\" had been pinpointed, the machine setting
could be found and the cipher messages turned into readable text.

cW)-More than the logic and goals were similar. The techniques were
essentially the same. Two messages that were thought to have been
produced by the same key (as suggested by such evidence as the same
callsigns and indicators), were placed one above the other. Coincidences
were then counted and evaluated against the number expected by chance.
The counting was repeated for each ofthe offsets. Turing even mechanized
the process through the use of overlay sheets. Holes were punched in the
sheets to represent the text. When the two sheets were superimposed, the
coincident holes were very easy to identify. That allowed relatively
unskilled labor to be used to tally the results. The overlap




TOP 5E&HET//C0MIHT//REL TO UCA, AUG, CAM, rtBP flMn N7I »Y1

method could also be used to exploit the information that could be drawn
out of the indicators in the messages.

CfiS) Turing went further with his ideas. He developed his IC-like
approach into an elegant predictive system. His \"bans\" were
statistical estimates of how likely it would be that two messages would
prove to be of value in identifying the cipher keys. Such estimates
allowed the cryptanalysts to make rational decisions about allocating
their very precious time. They could concentrate their skills on the
messages most likely to yield results.

(■\'iS} Banburismus was Britain\'s initial method of attack on the
German naval Enigma and continued as its most powerful tool until 1942.
Helped by other techniques, such as \"scritching,\"18 it was the way Hut
8 identified two of the three wheels used in an Enigma setting. Once the
wheels were specified, the analysts could attack the other parts of the
Enigma \"key.\"

CSS\^ Unfortunately, while Turing\'s Banburismus was an advance on the
state of cryptanalytic art, it was not strong enough to be a timeless
and independent conqueror of Enigma. Its target of the early 1940s, the
naval Enigma, was too rugged. The success of Banburismus depended,
despite Turing\'s hopes, on knowing the contents of the very special
\"E\" instruction sheets the German Navy used. From 1939 to the end of
1942, when Banburismus was no longer employed against the naval systems,
the British had to capture or, with a great expenditure of manpower,
reconstruct bigram and other complex tables that were used to
superencrypt the naval \"E\" indicators. Banburismus went blind several
times when the Germans changed the tables.

(TS//8I) As used against the naval systems, Banburismus was also
dependent upon having a very large number of messages in \"depth.\" As
many as 300 messages might be needed to allow

the identification of the Enigma wheels.19 Even with enough messages,
Banburismus needed more help.

CTS//SI) Banburismus was elegant, but it was not self-sufficient. Wheel
wiring had to be known, and \"cribs\" and much hand testing were
required to identify the plugboard connections and wheel turnover
points. 2° A very large investment had to be made in compiling a catalog
of all the possible enciphernents of the German word for \"first.\" It
was needed to supplement the statistical analysis with primitive
cribbing. That \"Eins\" catalog drained the resources of Bletchley Park,
but it did not prove as timesaving as hoped. Moving from the suspected
location of the crib word \"Eins\" to the catalog entry for its possible
setting and then testing to see if the key had truly been found were too
demanding.21

fK\*Hn near desperation, Turing turned to a full-blown crib approach. He
relegated Banburismus to being an adjunct to his version of the Bomba.
By 1940 he had designed a machine that was to be a high-speed,
automated, and near universal \"catalog.\" His device would take any
long crib and test it against all possible wheel settings of an Enigma
and do it within minutes.

\(U) Given the technology available to him, this rather crude method
seemed the only alternative. Thus, while he explored the application of
other statistical methods to the \"E\" problem, he sketched out a new
Bombe.22 It used some of the ideas of the Polish Bomba, but the British
Bombe and its logic were special.

\(U) Turing\'s Bombe was an electromechanical analog of the Enigma.23 It
was based on identifying logical contradictions as represented by flows
of electricity. Its banks of interconnected highspeed \"E\" wheels spun
until they found a setting that might have produced the crib setup on
the machine. Like the Bomba, it needed to search through all the wheel
settings, and it accepted the

TOP CCrPCT»rr\>MIMT»PCI TH IICA, AIIQ CAM \^BD A Kin M7\| \^



TOP OCOrcCTOOOMIHT/mCL TO IKA, AIJ?, CAM, GRff fthlfl N7I fOH

consequences of relying upon a special-purpose machine.

\(U) Turing\'s Bombe needed a great deal of prior information about
German networks and their keys. His crib attack was premised on knowing
the wiring and turnover pattern of each \"E\" wheel, and it needed
insights into the plugboard and other settings of each Enigma net.
Turing knew his Bombe could have been made as useless as the Polish
machine if the Germans significantly increased the number of letters
changed by the \"E\'s\* plugboard, if they stopped using stereotyped
phrases at the beginning of their messages, or if they ended the
practice of sending \"E\" messages on simpler cipher systems. He also
knew that his machines would be expensive and that their construction
would perhaps ask too much of Britain\'s manufacturers.

(TO) Turing faced some stiff opposition when he requested that a program
be funded. Although he explained that Banburismus would reduce the
number of wheel combinations that had to be tested from more than 300 to
fewer than thirty, thus calling for only a dozen Bombes, administrators
at Bletchley had serious concerns.24 They did not want to waste money
and time on the construction of a machine that had to correctly scan
hundreds of circuits within a fraction of a second They knew the dangers
in trying to construct a reliable machine that was to have ten miles of
wire, a million soldered connections, and a clutter of mechanical parts.

\(U) More than the machinery was at risk. To find the right kind of cribs
for the Bombes called for the creation of a new and large group of
analysts to constantly mine German intercepts for new leads.25

\(U) Turing made his machine as universal as possible. Although it
followed the logic of pointing to the wheel settings that could not be
eliminated, it tested the settings against letter loops from within
relatively long plaintext phrases

(cribs) in messages. Relying upon words within messages rather than
indicators guaranteed a longer life to his Bombes and promised fewer
false drops.

\(U) A bit of luck made the Bombe even stronger. Before Turing had
finished his design for a machine to attack the three-wheel Enigmas, a
young mathematician appeared at Bletchley Park whose insight multiplied
the Bombe\'s abilities. Gordon Welchman\'s suggestion for the \"diagonal
board\" allowed an instantaneous test for the influence ofthe plugboard
setting and allowed the effective use of relatively \"weak\" cribs, ones
without long letter loops.26

\(U) Analog and Parallel May Be Fast, But\...

\(U) Although electronics was tempting and although men like Turing knew
that digital processing would become the basis for modern computers, a
large number of machines had to be put in operation in weeks, not years.
Britain needed working machines immediately. In late 1939 GC&CS\'s
managers had to turn to someone who could produce immediate and
sure-fire technical results. They found the right man: \"Doc\" Harold
Keen, the head engineer at Britain\'s version of IBM, the British
Tabulating Machine Company. Keen built a prototype in a few weeks and
was able to begin sending some operational Bombes to GC&CS in a few
months. One reason for his fast work was the use of standard,
tried-and-true parts and analog logic.

\(U) To match Turing\'s logic, Keen designed new five-inch commutator
drums that were hard rubber and metal contact imitations of a double
Enigma wheel.27 The drums were arranged in banks of three, each being a
double analog of an Enigma scrambler unit. One wheel in each bank was
run continuously, another moved after a full revolution ofthe first, and
the last stepped after the other two had completed their cycles.


TOP CECRETOCOMINTOREL TO UCA, AUB, CAM, GBR AND MZUX1



\(U) As the Bombe\'s wheels spun over the commutator connections, they
created instantaneous multiple electrical pathways through the other
banks. Then the electrical charges went to the relays that matched the
flows against the crib. At the same time, they surged through the
Welchman diagonal board to test the assumptions about the setup of the
\"E\" plugboard.

\(U) In the first models a great deal was expected of the operators. To
identify the wheel positions when a hit was encountered, they had to
touch the relays. Eventually, a small printer was attached to the
machines.

\(U) Keen\'s engineering task was made more difficult by the need to test
for another type of logical impossibility. To make the test, he had to
pass the output of the wheels through the diagonal board. The diagonal
board was a twenty-six by twenty-six matrix of resistors that
instantaneously sensed inconsistencies such as two different input
letters being enciphered into the same output letter.

\(U) To test all possible wheel combinations against just one crib for a
three-wheel Enigma called for at least sixty machines. The Germans ran
dozens of systems, and only hundreds of Bombes could have provided
unaided coverage of them all. Turing\'s method of reducing the number of
wheel combinations that had to be tested was soon overwhelmed by
improvements in the German systems and by the proliferation of
encryption networks.

\(U) Unfortunately, BTMC faced too many shortages of men and materials to
keep up the early pace of production. Keen was able to send less than a
machine a month to Turing during 1940 and 1941. In early 1942, the
record was not much better. Bletchley had only sixteen bombes and
production had slowed.28 To produce two of the Bombes a month stretched
Britain\'s productive capacity. Bletchley Park was unable to build up
enough of an inventory of them to seriously

challenge any Enigma system until the end of 1942 and in the first days
of 1943 GC&CS still had fewer than fifty machines.

\(U) But it was not until mid-1942 that Britain\'s leaders decided to
commit massive resources to the Bombe program. Only when they seemed
essential to victory in Africa and to the safety of the Middle Eastern
oil supplies was \"Doc\" Keen given new factories and a large workforce.
That allowed BTMC to produce some 200 three-wheel Bombes by the end of
the war.29

\(U) Although Britain did not have much of an Ultra Secret in the
critical months of 1940-41, she wanted to keep what she had to herself.
Britain\'s codebreakers feared revealing their methods, even to the
Americans, whose military aid had become essential to their nation\'s
survival.30 They had a not unwarranted fear that sharing with America
would lead to breaches of security and the demise of Ultra.31

\(U) The World War II relationship between the British and American
cryptanalysts began in confusion and mistrust. It took several years to
reach workable accords, and the formal, longlasting agreements came
after, not during, the war.

\(U) The trust that became the foundation of the Cold War cooperation
between the two nations did not come easily. There were critical months
in late 1942 and mid-1943 when it appeared that what had been achieved
since 1940 would be lost. The combination of British reluctance,
America\'s divided armed services, misunderstood agreements, and lost
messages almost led to an end to the joint intelligence program.

\(U) Ask and Then Not Receive

■4\$} Britain\'s leaders had begun making overtures about sharing
\"scientific\" information as early as February 1940. When the
suggestions reached the American Army and Navy codebreak





ers, they did not reject the possibility of some sort of exchange. But
Safford and his superiors in Naval Communications soon cooled to the
idea, leaving William Friedman as the only advocate among the
cryptanalysts.32

\(U) Friedman could not deal face-to-face with the British; frustrations
grew and there was a break in the negotiations. There may have been
vague promises offull cryptologic cooperation between Roosevelt and
Churchill in mid-1940, but they did not lead to any significant
exchanges among the codebreakers.33

\(U) Then after Britain began to send the United States Navy information
on the disposition of German forces, it appeared that an agreement about
an exchange of secrets was imminent34

\(U) In September 1940 William Friedman drew up a detailed plan for
cooperation between the two nations only to encounter a wary American
navy that again blocked its implementation.

-fj9}-But the navy did not have its way. The War Departments
representatives made agreements for «fcll» exchange of information in
December and exerted enough political pressure to sweep away the navy\'s
objections.35 OP-20-G was given orders to cooperate. It was told to
select two men to join an army and FBI team that was to sail to England.

-(S}-The navy was unhappy about being forced to exchange its secrets in
spring 1941. Then when the Americans concluded that what Britain was
willing to show the Americans was much less than expected, some in the
American cryptanalytic community became furious over the balance between
what America gave to GC&CS and what it got in return.J

\(U) Gave All and Got.,.

\(U) The delegation of American cryptanalysts from OP-20-G, the army\'s
SIS, and the FBI had sailed for England in late January. They handed
over two extremely valuable analogs of the Purple machine for the
Japanese diplomatic ciphers, two copies of another Japanese enciphering
machine, and all the other keys to the top secret Magic system. In
addition, all that the United States had on major Japanese attache,
navy, and consular codes was surrendered. As with the Purple machines,
giving those paper copies of the codes to Britain meant fewer were
available to America\'s own codebreakers.37The American generosity did
not end there, however. Britain was promised a continuous flow of
cryptologic information, including the American Coast Guard\'s methods
of tapping the German clandestine systems.\"38

\(U) In return, GC&CS opened its doors and made the American visitors
feel quite welcome. But it gave them very little of real value, at least
about \"E.\"

£ES//SI) At first the Americans thought the British were completely
open. Although the Americans were told to pose as Canadians, they felt
that few restrictions had been imposed on them. They accepted the order
against taking any notes on what they were shown and took having to sign
a binding security oath as reasonable.

-fS\^-They felt they had been told all about the British attack against
Italian, South American, and Russian systems.39 GC&CS also shared its
work on Japanese naval systems. And the Americans were shown the Bombe.
The navy\'s men were given a paper version of an Enigma, were handed a
copy of a few days\' worth of old keys, and given a part of a \"short\"
catalog.

\(U) The army\'s representatives were given similar information, and they
and the navy men were informed of the earlier successes against the


TOP SFrBFJTWCOMIMTORiL TO USA, AU6, GAH, GBR AND UOJIKi



German air force\'s \"E\" and the system Germany had used during the
Norwegian campaign.40

\(U) What they did not get was what many had thought the trip across the
Atlantic was really for, the cryptanalytic keys to the naval Enigma. The
Americans did not obtain an Enigma machine or enough cryptanalytic
information to allow the United States to break into the submarine \"E\"
on its own,

4«

\(U) What Happened After

\(U) Although the American visitors to Bletchley Park may have left too
soon to be told of the successes of mid-1941, the British could have
been much more open than they were during the remainder of the year.

fGS\* Despite GC&CS\'s proclamation that full cooperation was in force,
the American navy men had not been given an adequate explanation of the
logic of the Bombe during their visit, were probably not indoctrinated
into Banburismus, and were told little about the art of obtaining cribs
for the naval Enigma attack.42 The FBI and army representatives were
also not told all.

TFS-)-A U. S. Navy historical report on the \"E\" problem stated:43
\"Prior to the outbreak of the war with Germany, the nature of the
German machine employed by the Atlantic U-boats was known in that the
British had supplied to this Division diagrams of the wiring and the
wheels of the device, together with a description of the way in which it
moved. Beyond this and some few examples of plain text, nothing was
known as to the usage of neither the device nor the method in which the
keys could be recovered. It was then known that the British had
conducted a successful attack, but the details of it were unavailable to
the American Navy, due to the reluctance of the British to discuss the
same.\"

(T3//0I) The desire of the British to safeguard their secret powers was
reflected by their failure

to communicate the news or details of their achievements to the
Americans after March 1941. Little cryptanalytic information crossed the
Atlantic although some vigorous protest came from OP-20-G beginning in
July 1941.44 Even a visit to America in late summer by a very important
British cryptanalyst did not lead to the Americans being told of the
ways to attack \"E.\" 45

\(U) Trust Builds Very Slowly

\(U) For a year after the American delegation left England, there were
few direct contacts between the two nations\' cryptanalysts. There were
some negotiating sessions about the range and degree of cooperation, but
during the remainder of 1941 it seemed to many Americans that Britain
became less, not more, willing to yield its growing pool of Enigma
secrets.46

(TS) The situation became quite tense by November. OP-20-G\'s men
convinced the Director of Naval Communications to send a very strong
protest to England. He told GC&CS he thought that the earlier agreement
was not being fulfilled and demanded an immediate flow of cryptanalytic
information. The British responded with true diplomacy explaining that
all that had been promised had been sent to the United States and that
it would be impossible for them to send everything that the American
navy \"might\" want. It was better, they said, for the Americans to
request specific information. Then if the British judged it was really
of import to the United States, it would be sent. A quite similar
message was forwarded to the American army. Although England began to
send information on German diplomatic systems to Friedman\'s group,
England continued to keep its \"E\" methods a secret.47

\(U) Agreements and Agreements and Agreements, But\....

(T0//0I) OP-20-G was, of course, very unhappy about being required to
ask for specifics; they did not know enough to compile a list. But the





tension was relieved by some end-of-year exchanges. When Laurance
Safford finally received some replies to his earlier inquiries, when
Britain hinted they would soon send a copy of their \"machine\" and a
technician to America, and when GC&CS apologized for losing some
American letters within its bureaucracy, \"G\" sensed it was going to be
made a full cryptologic partner.48

\(U) Under some prodding from the United States, additional agreements
were made in early and mid-1942, ones that began to move the two nations
toward a level of unprecedented cooperation. Then the sweeping October
1942 accords eased some tensions raised by an American navy threat to go
its own way on Enigma. After that, the BRUSA pact of May 1943 was a
major step toward openness with the army.49

\(U) But it was not until the UKUSA agreement of 1946 that the two
nations forged that unique relationship of trust that was maintained
throughout the Cold War.50

\(U) There were more than a few frictions on the road to BRUSA and UKUSA;
during 1942 and 1943 the British were slow to reveal all about Ultra,
especially during 1942. The American cryptanalysts had interpreted the
agreements of 1941 to mean that Britain was to share all and that
America was to become a full partner in Ultra. Although negotiating
separately, both \"G\" and the SIS concluded the same thing. They
expected that Britain would give them all they needed, if they wished to
read \"E\* systems. A copy of the British Bombe designed for the older
three-wheel machines was expected by \"G\" before the summer of 1942,
and some Americans thought that all British information on new Bombes
for the naval four-wheel Enigma would be immediately sent across the
Atlantic. The British did not seem to agree.

\(U) Going Separate Ways?

(T0//0I) When \"G\'s\* frantic February 1942 plea for help against
Enigma in the Atlantic did not get a response, tempers flared again.
OP-20G\'s new commander, Captain Redman, under intense pressure from
Admiral King to do something about the Atlantic submarine crisis,
concluded that GC&CS had been giving America the \"runaround.\" It did
not take him long to secure permission to begin another and very
determined series of negotiations with the British. With Joseph Wenger
at his side, Redman began to make it very clear that unless cooperation
began immediately, the American navy would go its own way despite any of
the danger that two uncoordinated attacks on Enigma might pose.

\^JS\^ When the Americans came to realize that the U-boat commanders had
made a radical change in their \"E\" systems and that the British claims
of imminent reentry were far from true, they began to take action. Sl

fTO) ■Britain sensed there was a crisis and decided to send one of its
most important codebreakers to America. He was told to calm the
Americans without, however, giving them GC&CS\'s great secrets. When
Colonel John Hitman arrived in April 1942, he found it impossible to
agree with official British policy. The American navy\'s codemen were so
adamant and their threats to go their own way were so credible that
Hitman advised England that it must yield.52

(\'ESKThe final breakthrough seemed to come in May 1942. Promises came
from England that a Bombe and a technician would be in America before
autumn and that men from \"G\" would be invited to Bletchley
Park.53There was some hope that the American army\'s cryptanalysts might
be allowed into the \"E\" circle. GC&CS signaled that it would accept
some help from Leo Rosen, SIS\'s electronics expert.54


top ocoRCT/fooMiNTy/RCL TO USA, aus, can, obr aiib mzu/xi


top qi:gri:t//comint//rcl to uoa, auo, can, odr and nzu/xi

TK\>}- But the May promises did not end American suspicions, nor did
they lead \"G\" to trust the solution of\"E\" to the British. Adding to
the tensions, there was disagreement over the details of when and how
\"G\'s\" experts were to be allowed back into Bletchley Park. Then, when
a copy of the latest English Bombe was not shipped to America on
schedule, when it took six months of requests to obtain promised
blueprints, when Britain kept insisting that the United States work only
on Japanese problems, and when it was clear that England did not want to
give anything to the SIS, some American codebreakers again became very
skeptical of British intentions.

T\^S) The suspicions led to action. Despite the recent accords, in
August 1942 OP-20-G felt it had to protest about the failure of the
British to keep their promises. Also, the relations between SIS and
GC&CS became very tense. The armyBritish relationship became so strained
that protests reached the White House.55

\(U) America without an Ultra

\(U) At its entry into the war, OP-20-G had only the most rudimentary
knowledge of the Enigma and was not at all sure about the contours of
the new U-boat system.56 Some disgruntled American officers blamed
Britain\'s unwillingness to share, but the reasons why American
cryptanalysts were helpless lay in America, not Europe.57

\(U) Since the turn of the century, America\'s strategic planners had
seen Japan as the enemy. Some in the American military did worry about
Germany, but it seemed beyond imagination that France and Britain would
be unable to contain her on the continent. Few thought they would fail
to block Germany\'s navy and air force from making the Atlantic unsafe
for America. The concentration on Japan led to another dangerous
assumption: No matter what the enemy did, the United States would have
the time to prepare itself for war.

\(U) Those assumptions were accompanied by ones about the nation\'s
economy. Fundamental was that American industry would automatically
provide any great technological advances needed by the military. It is
no wonder that the calls by men such as Hooper and Bowen for ongoing
research and Bush\'s drive to establish government-sponsored science
remained largely unanswered.58

\(U) Despite a lack of resources, by spring 1941 American naval ships
were involved in dangerous scrapes with German U-boats in the Atlantic.
By autumn the Americans were ordered to escort England-bound convoys.

\(U) OP-20-G was as unprepared as the rest of the navy. To fulfill its
obligations in the Atlantic, it expanded its interception net. To please
England, it put most of its men on tactical analysis rather than
codebreaking. At the same time, the navy\'s cryptanalytic ally, the
Coast Guard, launched an attack on German clandestine messages. But the
spy messages and the bits and pieces from some cracks in the German
diplomatic systems yielded little about the German navy. OP-20-G had no
effective Atlantic cryptologic power, and the navy had to rely upon
British supplied intelligence.59

\(U) When the U-boat command changed its Enigma and Hitler unleashed his
American war, OP-20-G\'s cryptanalytic weakness became intolerable. When
it was realized that Britain was closed out of the U-boats\' new M4
Enigma Shark system and as Britain seemed more interested in the German
army and air force systems, OP-20-G decided to find its own way to
penetrate Enigma.

\(U) An American Ultra, Perhaps

(T0//0I) In spring 1942 the American navy was ordered to start forging
its own \"E\" capability. Despite the crisis in the Pacific and the old
hopes of building general-purpose computers, Howard\'s men and those in
\"M\" were ordered to





focus on the Atlantic Shark problem and to produce an immediate
solution.60

\(U) When the decision was made to create its own \"E\" solution, OP-20-G
was very short-handed and had to turn much of the work over to
Engstrom\'s group of college men in the \"M\" section. 6l They began
with few tools and the burden of Britain\'s fears of an independent
American Ultra capability.

\(V) Faster Than a Speeding Relay

\(U) Bletchley Park\'s very overworked men had let almost a year slip by
without focusing significant resources on a Bombe for M4, the fourwheel
U-boat Enigma.62 The Germans\* introduction of additional encryption
wheels an operator could choose from also presented a great challenge.
Changes in the related German codes, radio networks, and procedures
compounded the problems.

\(U) GC&CS called on the famous WynnWilliams and asked him to explore the
use of electronics for a super-bombe. Williams spent many frustrating
months trying to create an electronic Bombe, His efforts stretched into
spring 1942 with little more to show than a breadboard model of a
primitive \"E\" wheel. While he was asked to make a fresh start on his
ideas, GC&CS turned back to \"Doc\" Keen and BTMC. Immediately the
pragmatic Keen rejected an electronic solution and began to give some
thought to alternatives.63 He created the outlines of a new four-wheel
Bombe but advised GC&CS that it might take more than a year to design
and build the first model.64 His prediction proved correct. Britain
would not have the first of its very few temperamental electromechanical
four-wheel Bombes until early summer 1943.65

\(U) Great British Expectations

\(U) Meanwhile, Wynn-Williams continued to plod along with his ideas; by
midyear he began to

construct a prototype of his Bombe. To his disappointment, it had to
rely as much on mechanics as on electronics.

™(T0//01) Williams had decided to build a

complex attachment for the regular three-wheel British Bombes. His Cobra
was to be a large box that was to contain his new high-speed electronic
wheel and newly designed control and \"hit\" location devices. At first
he bet that he could coax electronics to do the entire job. It took a
long time to admit even partial defeat, but he had to back away from his
original plan. He turned his Cobra into a combination of very high-speed
commutators (3,000 rpm) and electronic memory and control circuits.

ffl)//SI)- The compromise did not lead to immediate success, however.
Williams had asked a great deal of electronics and mechanics. The Cobra
was planned to be exceptionally fast. In addition to the tube circuits
and the new wheels, run time was to be shortened by recording \"hits\"
without stopping the Bombe. All that was too much for Williams\' small
team. His first machine had to suffer the indignity of a thorough
reworking at the end of 1943 before it had done any operational work.
Although a dozen of his new Bombes were eventually employed in England,
they remained temperamental.66

\(U) Great American Expectations

\(U) While Williams and Keen were rushing to find their technological
answers to the M4, GC&CS learned of America\'s Ultra intentions.
Frightened by what it discovered, in spring 1942 it rushed a group of
its leaders to the States hoping to reach an understanding that would
protect its Ultra monopoly.

\(U) March 1942 saw Britain strike the first of a series of new bargains.
It assured OP-20-G that Shark was about to be beaten, and it agreed to
share more Enigma information with the navy. In exchange, it asked \"G\"
to concentrate on the





Japanese problems and let Britain manage European intelligence. The
Americans desired cordial relations with the British, but they would not
abandon Enigma. \"G\" agreed to cooperate but stood by its commitment to
an American program.

\(U) Despite two years of \"understandings\" with the British, OP-20-G
launched into its own Enigma and Bombe programs without a true
understanding of the Atlantic Enigma or the British Bombe. The historic
OP-20-G directive of April 1942 gave a very incomplete view of Enigma,
Shark, and the British Bombe. America\'s experts were able to outline
only the workings of the older three-wheel plugboard version of Enigma,
and they seemed uncertain about a key component, the reflector.
Furthermore, OP-20G\'s memorandum contained only the most general ideas
about the British Bombe\'s logic.67

\(U) While waiting for the promised information from England, \"G\'s\"
men were told to define a true American Bombe. Given all they did not
know about Turing\'s and Welchman\'s methods and machines, the first
plans for the American Bombe do not seem too bizarre.68

(TS//SI) OP-20-G made Howard Engstrom\'s young men responsible for the
Bombe project. The closest \"G\" had to an Enigma expert, Lieutenant
Commander R. B. Ely, was charged with devising the logic of the machine.
After reviewing all the methods he knew to attack \"E,\" he suggested
that \"G\" might have to turn to a cribbased approach.

(TS//SI) Ely, armed with only a few hints about how the British machine
worked (gained through some test problems the British had previously
sent over), independently arrived at a primitive version of the
architecture Turing had designed three years before. As soon as he was
able to sketch the logic of his machine, he sought an engineer. Not
unexpectedly, one of the young men from MIT was selected.

(TS//SI) John Howard was asked to solve the hardware and manufacturing
problems. While Howard discussed possibilities with men such as Joe
Desch of NCR,69 Ely asked for help from others in Engstrom\'s section.
He wanted assistance to check his ideas against cryptanalytic needs. And
he wanted help finding, if it was possible, an architecture for a
computer more universal than Turing\'s. Soon Ely\'s original ideas were
reshaped.

(TS//SI) The conception of what the American navy\'s Bombe would be was
logically primitive but technically grandiose. In spring 1942 \"G\'s\"
men knew so little about the Enigma systems they did not include the
important instantaneous stecker setting tester in their design, and they
thought their machine could use permanently fixed \"wheels.\" As
important, they thought they would have to have either a separate Bombe
for each of the wheel combinations and permutations or one truly giant
machine.

(TS//SI) Apparently, as late as early summer 1942, Britain had not
informed them of the \"diagonal board,\" the many methods its
codebreakers had devised to reduce the number of wheel combinations to
be tested, nor how many different wheels the Germans made available with
the M4. \"G\" did not know that the British had found it wise to leave
tests for Enigma ring-settings and wheel starting-points off their
Bombes.70

(TS//SI) \"G\'s\" technical visions were far from backwards, however. As
soon as the idea of an American Bombe had emerged, electronics became
the focus of attention. A breadboard model of a \"wheel\" was begun.
Completing it would not be easy because the Enigma wheel was difficult
to imitate, and constructing a universal one was a daunting task.
Cloning one wheel with known wiring meant having twenty-six tubes
connected to twenty-six others and having a rack of supplementary
circuitry. A universal \"wheel\" needed 26 x 26 tubes and all the
circuitry needed to switch them as needed to imitate any of the possible
wiring connections.

T\*» iMTTiinn Tiinn in i.on »nc- r\^n /jffrf ftHP M7I ffv1




(T0//GB But Howard and the other navy engineers were so confident about
electronics that as early as April 1942 Wenger was informing the British
that American electronics might save their Bombe program. The faith in
an electronic solution continued well into the summer, and some thought
the American Bombe might turn out to be a single high-speed and complex
tube machine that would do as much as or more than all of the British
mechanical monsters.71

CRD//0I) Such a machine could save much time because it would also
automatically reset the wheel(s) for each run and would never have to
stop to record \"hits.\" It was to have a high-speed system to
photograph the diagonal board and a set of counters that would record
the wheel positions at each hit.

CBS//SJQ Those time-savers were secondary, however. What was important
was the speed of electronics. In early spring it was thought that the
American Bombe could do its job if it performed 10,000 tests a second.
Faith in the machine\'s speed was necessary because it was going to be
asked to do much more than Turing\'s Bombe. It would test for the some
300 possible wheel orders, the 440,000 \[sic\] stecker possibilities,
and the ring settings.72

(TB//St-) Soon it was realized that even greater faith in electronics
was required. When the run time for all that was recalculated, the need
for much faster electronics was realized. Given the way the Americans
were designing their Bombe at the time, one large one, a feasible
machine called for circuits that could make millions of tests per
second. That kind of speed was far beyond the electronics of the 1940s,
but there was no indication that frightened the Americans. They had such
engineering optimism and knew they could command so many resources that,
if one electronic machine would not do the job, perhaps 300 or so of
their special electronic \"dibbers\" could be built.73

\(U) While Engstrom\'s men were exploring their options and while they
waited for the expected flow of information about the Bombe and allied
methods from England, WG\" continued on with its fight to achieve
Wenger\'s old dream of using pure techniques. OP-20-G\'s new college men
intensified their search for advanced pure statistical and mathematical
methods and machines. Hypo, Tessie and the Comparator were still seen as
general- rather than special-purpose alternatives.

\(U) But as summer arrived, the crew at \"G\" started to become angry and
worried. Little helpful information had come from England, and the two
men OP-20-G planned to send to Bletchley Park were not scheduled to
leave until July.74

fSf/SB-GC&CS was being more open with the Americans and informed them of
the Fish systems. But Britain\'s codemen still seemed to hold back on
the Bombes and what was necessary to their success, the methods of
finding surefire cribs. Although offering GC&CS full information on all
the advanced high-speed cryptanalytic machines it was developing,75
OP-20-G was made to wait for a reply to its specific requests and for a
clear statement of British policy on cryptanalytic cooperation.76
Especially frustrating were the delays in providing Bombe details.
Requesting blueprints of Britain\'s \"latest\" machines in May, the
Americans hoped their examination would prevent them from committing to
an American Bombe that was inefficient or simply unworkable. The prints
did not arrive as promised.

(3S//SI) The Americans were under too much pressure to accept the
continued stream of British \"excuses.\" By the time Ely and Eachus were
ready to depart for GC&CS, Joseph Wenger and his superiors became
convinced that Britain would never finish the four-wheel Bombe they had
promised to have working by mid-1942. Worse, they thought that the
British had not lived up to the agreements that had been made since
America entered the war. Less than guarded





\\

words were used in some of the exchanges between \"G\" and England.77

(TS//SI) The British reacted to the American protests by sending more
information, hoping that \"G\" would reverse its decision to build its
own anti-Enigma capability. OP-20-G gradually learned more about
Britain\'s cryptanalytic methods, including those used to avoid testing
all \"E\" wheel combinations. And when the two men from \"G,\" Ely and
Eachus, reached Bletchley Park, they began shipping home the detailed
information the navy had sought for the last two years.

-(S//SI) But the Americans remained very worried. They feared they would
be unable to build their more universal machine or their own version of
the English Bombe. Worse, OP-20-G\'s leaders deeply feared that even if
they built such a Bombe, they would always remain dependent upon Britain
for the necessary copies of captured \"E\" wheels, codebooks, and
cribs.78

\(U) Trying to Step Foruiard, Not Back

\(U) A few atOP-20-G were convinced that America could beat England\'s
famed WynnWilliams to a super-high-speed electronic machine, but others
in the OP-20-G group were less sure of an independent American success.

\(U) Although Ely and Eachus were sending back important information, the
navy continued to have to formally request much on the English Bombe and
the emerging new solutions to the Enigma systems. More fundamental, by
the end of the summer the Americans became concerned that Britain would
never devote enough resources to the Atlantic U-boat problem.79 There
was some foundation for the American anxiety.

\(U) Britain\'s Own Version of Bush\'s Electronic Dreams

(T0//0T) Tnlate spring 1942, as part of the reallocation of GC&CS
resources, Wynn-Williams

was asked to turn his Bombe work over to someone else and to take on
another job: devise a highspeed engine to crack the binary additive
system of the Fish machines. He agreed, and while continuing on with his
electronic Bombe work he designed the first of the Robinson rapid
analytic machines.80 Very soon, the designs were turned into hardware,
electronic hardware.

(TOf/Ol) The first Robinson (Heath) was delivered in early 1943, well
before any of the newest models of Bush\'s Comparators reached
OP-20-G\'s headquarters. They were based on a statistical attack, not
the type of crude crib-bashing of the Bombes.81 Robinson used high-speed
punched tapes, photoelectric readers, and some one hundred gas-filled
tubes to keep track of results.82 The Robinsons shared something else
with Bush\'s machines, the very serious problem of keeping the tapes in
alignment. There were differences, however. The Robinson\'s target was a
binary additive system. That called for a different use of the tapes.
One tape was for a message; the other held the stream of \"key.\"

(T0//0I) Fortunately for the British and the history of computers, that
binary stream presented an opportunity to avoid the difficulty of
aligning the tapes. When it was realized that the second Robinson tape
was a stream of algorithmgenerated bits, it was suggested that a machine
be constructed that substituted tube circuits for the additive tape.
Reckoning that the number of tubes needed for the generation of binary
combinations was reasonable, GC&CS gave the green light to construction
of the Colossus.83

\(U) The Colossus was something of a miracle of project management. It
took less than a year to create what many consider the finest electronic
pre-computer. Colossus kept 2,500 tubes and a high-speed photoelectric
paper tape reader in synchronization. It could even be coaxed into
performing some primitive program steps and \"if statements.





(TO//OI) Colossus was very smart. It followed some ofTuring\'s maxims
about how to save search time. It had an electronic circuit that polled
its counters to see if the results of the run were building to a
significant outcome. This \"sigmage\" circuit saved hundreds of hours of
machine and analyst effort. It also prevented Colossus from printing the
result of every pass of the tapes, something the wasteful Comparators
and the first Robinsons could not do.84

\(U) The first of more than ten versions of Colossus was put into
operation in January 1944-85

\(U) The Americans Almost Beat England to Electronics

\(U) The U-boat rampage in the Atlantic led to extreme criticisms of the
American navy while the army was becoming worried that its men would go
into battle in Africa and Europe without an\"E\" capability. Politically
dangerous, Britain was giving them far less than the already meager
ration of Enigma information it was providing the navy

\(U) Responding to all the various pressures, OP-20-G put even more
resources into its frantic effort to conquer the U-boat \"E,\" and the
army began to think of the machines it might need for what it called the
\"Yellow Problem.\"86 The army\'s SIS had difficulties obtaining
information and resources and did not launch a machine program until the
fall, but at the beginning of summer 1942, OP-20-G hinted it had a
solution to the M4. Within another two months it announced that its men
had beaten Britain and the great WynnWilliams to the creation of the
heart of a fully electronic Bombe.87 The circuit wasn\'t the universal
machine \"G\" wanted, but no time was lost in trying to exploit the
development. NCR was taken over by the navy to be a research center and
possibly a production site. John Howard\'s old group became an integral
part of Howard Engstrom\'s

::: {style="width: 41.647058823529406%;"}
:::

\(U) Colossus

\"M\" as it was reorganized to oversee the electronic Bombe work at NCR.

\(U) Wenger, Engstrom, and their like had to show some results.88 The
Bombe became important to \"M\'s\" survival as well as to the Battle of
the Atlantic.

\(U) No Time for Electronic

\(U) In late summer 1942 the engineers of the \"M\" group decided their
work was far enough along to submit it to an experienced production
engineer for examination. Of course, they turned to Joe Desch. He spent
almost two months examining their bench model and their designs for an
electronic Bombe.89 He came to a devastating conclusion: An electronic
Bombe was an impossibility!90 A universal machine would need thousands
more tubes and even higher speeds. The





thousands of tubes would be difficult to acquire, would create too much
heat, and would demand more electrical power than could be supplied.91

\(U) A Crisis of Organization and Technology

\(U) Desch commanded so much respect that the responsibility for a new
design was shifted to him. Necessarily, he was informed of one of
America and Britain\'s great secrets, Ultra. After additional study of
what was known about the Turing Bombe, he promised that he would be able
to produce an electromechanical machine that could tackle the Shark M4.
He declared he could create an original American Bombe but a
nonelectronic one.

\(U) Immediately, anew effort, the second American Bombe project, was
begun. As a result, Wenger\'s dream of a Rapid Machine program was
saved. For most of the remaining war years, the electromechanical Bombes
devoured the energies of \"G\'s\" engineers. To fulfill the commitment
to Desch\'s necessary backward technological leap, all the truly
advanced projects and ideas were made stepchildren.

\(U) The second American Bombe project almost faltered, but it eventually
became a triumph for OP-20-G and the American intelligence community.
The success of the Bombes and the Allied work on machines for the
Pacific war finally established the credibility Wenger needed to try to
make research a permanent part of OP-20G\'s peacetime operations.

\(U) Searching for a Place in Ultra

\(U) The second American Bombe project was part of an attempt to readjust
the relationship between Britain and America\'s codebreakers. Desch may
not have known it, but his Bombe was essential to OP-20-G gaining a
greater role in the Ultra Secret and to becoming a producer of
operational information. Without an American Bombe, the United States
would have remained a

consumer of British-controlled Ultra information, and OP-20-G would have
continued under the old understanding: Both nations could pursue
independent (unaided) research, but Britain would control all
operational activities. Although Britain had begun to ask for American
help on the Atlantic problems, with the failure of the second Bombe
project it would have been very reluctant to make OP-20-G an equal
partner.92

(TS//0I) The friction with Britain over Ultra intensified soon after the
approval of Desch\'s sketch of a modified British machine. The navy\'s
men became intolerant of what they considered broken promises by the
British about their fourwheel Bombe.93 OP-20-G more than hinted that it
would build as many as 350 of the Desch machines before spring 1943 when
the U-boats were expected to launch a mass attack. America was notifying
Britain that no matter what it took, the United States would win the
U-boat war.94 The Americans declared they intended to build enough
machines to test all Shark wheel orders simultaneously.95

\(V) The Power of Innocence

\(U) Given all that the Americans did not know about the Bombes and all
that was required to make them useful, miracles were required. Joseph
Desch\'s first description of the proposed \"G\" Bombe and its powers
reveals how much the American Bombe program was based upon the type of
optimism that comes from innocence, if not ignorance.

9\*

-ffS//0I) Some ofthe detailed plans ofthe three-wheel British Bombes had
begun to reach the United States in late summer 1942, but Desch\'s
design was his own. He had begun his plans before the British had
revealed more than the bare essentials of their machine and the
cribbased \"menus\" that made it work. \^ And he arrived at his first
design before he had been able to test his assumptions about the way the
essential components of his Bombe would behave.

TOP OCOrCTJ/OOMINTORCL TO UGA, AUG, CAM, GBR AMD HZL//X1



TOP OCORCTOCOMINT/mEL TO USA, AUS, CAM, QBE AND NZU/XI

£S//SI) Desch\'s plans were technically optimistic. He thought it
possible to create a drive system that could keep twenty-four
double-ended Enigma analogs (ninety-six commutators) in perfect
synchronization, A large electric motor would drive a high-speed shaft
that would directly turn the shafts for the fast wheels. Gears, machined
for complex ratios, would connect the high-strength rods for the slower
wheels to the main shaft. The gears and shafts had to be of the highest
quality material and workmanship to stand the stress placed on them when
the machine suddenly stopped and restarted.

fS\^That was one unique feature of the proposed American Bombe that
would put Desch\'s faith in mechanics to a severe test. He proposed an
automatic stop, rewind, and restart system. That would save critical
running time and, as important, avoid having the machine\'s operators
having to hand-crank the device when a \"stop\" was sensed.

£S/-/SI) Once the testing circuits identified a possible \"hit,\" his
machine would cut the power to the main shaft, apply brakes and bring
the commutators to a halt all within a fraction of a second. Then a
second motor would immediately drive the commutators backwards until
another circuit signaled that the possible \"hit\" position had been
reached. The machine would then perform another series of circuit tests,
including a diagonal board search. If those tests indicated there were
no contradictions, the commutator positions and the diagonal board
indicators (the \"story\") were printed. Fortunately, \"G\" had not
asked Desch to build a machine that tested for the ring settings as well
as for the wheel orders and steckers.

---(8//3I?1mmediately after the \"stories\" were printed, the motor
would be restarted, the clutch on the central high-speed shaft would be
engaged, the gears would mesh, and the commutators would turn in
synchronization until another set of wheel positions indicated an Enigma
setting that might have produced the crib.

-\*&H)esch did not seem to worry about the stresses that the quick stop,
rewind, and restart systems would put on the shafts and gears, but Alan
Turing certainly did. When he visited NCR in December, he warned \"G\"
that it would be unlikely that any machine could be kept in working
order when it was asked to defy the laws of inertia.

\(6) Desch did not back away from the automatic rewind system nor did he
change his mind, during fall 1942, about having three complete Bombes in
a single rack. Such a configuration would save precious space (336
Bombes with 32,000 commutators in 112 racks). He was convinced that the
frames would tolerate the heavy vibrations from the three machines,
which would be independently starting and stopping.

-£S)-Desch also kept his faith in the ability of American technology to
make the \"G\" Bombe more flexible and many orders faster than those in
operation in England. His Bombes were to be very rapid, several times
the speed of the British three-wheel bombes and twice the speed of
England\'s proposed four-wheel machines.98 The fast wheel was to revolve
at 3,400 rpm. The others would run at proportionately lower speeds,
turning only when their faster mate had completed a full turn. The
second wheel, for example, would take one step after the fast wheel had
made a complete twenty-six-point revolution, plus additional revolutions
to compensate for the time the other wheels needed to turn over.

-(S\^-When desired, the Bombe could be turned into a three-wheel enigma
analog, and, Desch hoped, it could be run at various speeds.\"

(S\^-Joseph Desch premised his design on the power of America\'s mass
production methods to make all parts ofthe Bombes interchangeable.
NCR\'s machinists had assured Desch that he could achieve his critical
goal of having every commutator fit on any ofthe thousands of spindles
on the Bombes. That was a critical feaUire. If




commutators had to be tailored to each machine, his system would be
impractical. That would demand too many highly skilled workers for
commutator construction and too many commutators, perhaps as many as
60,000.

-f9}-Desch promised to make electronics as well as mechanics go beyond
normal expectations. He said he could overcome the problems that had led
most engineers to avoid the use of tubes. Amultitube Rossi detector
circuit would monitor the machines for possible \"hits,\" another
circuit would remember where the \"hit\" occurred, one would control
printing, and, he hinted, another very complex one would handle the
\"diagonal\" test. He was not sure in September 1942 how many tubes each
Bombe would have, but his memoranda hinted that his electromechanical
machine would need perhaps as many as 1,500 electronic components.100
The high-speed diagonal board alone might need more than 1,000 tubes.101

.\^•His September design asked more than could be expected of gas-filled
or vacuum tubes in the early 1940s. His faith translated into the blind
hope that the navy\'s engineers could keep more than 300,000 tubes
running atone time. \"G\" wanted to run each wheel order simultaneously.
That meant 336 Bombes with perhaps 1,000 tubes each running without a
flaw for perhaps as long as an hour.

■48\^ The electronics posed a serious challenge to the navy engineers.
They would have to find ways to handle the heat generated by the
electronic components and create methods of identifying troublesome
tubes before they failed. Desch went ahead, believing that the \"G\"
would find a way to overcome all the problems that had kept men like
Vannevar Bush from trying to build large-scale electronic machines.

4S\> Joe Desch had to believe in the future of electronics; his machine
could not work at what he thought was a minimum speed without elec

tronic switches. He could not build a \"memory\" for the machine out of
high-speed commutators, relays were too slow for the \"diagonal\" test,
and simple capacitors seemed unable to do the job.

\(U) The Power of Ignorance

•ijSf Desch thought the navy needed so many Bombes that ran so fast
because the Americans had not yet learned of the methods GC&CS used to
select the Enigma wheel orders that had to be tested on the Bombes.
GC&CS had discovered many ways of telling which wheel orders the Germans
would not use during a crypto period. They had also developed many
cryptanalytic techniques, which eliminated particular wheels and wheel
positions.

\~fQ)---.As significant for the history of the American Bombe project,
in autumn 1942 \"G\'s\" experts did not fully understand the methods
Britain had developed to allow the Bombes to quickly beat \"chance.\" As
a result, they had concluded that the United States had no alternative
but to invest millions of dollars in machines that were very
inefficient.

(S//8I)-The Bombes would be valuable only if used properly. When they
were given enough information, they speedily reduced the number of
Enigma wheel orders that had to be examined by the analysts. But if used
improperly, they could not sort out the wheel orders and stecker
settings that could have produced the cribs by accident from those
settings that were \"causal.\" With only relatively short crib-plain
combinations to test, twenty or so letters, a Bombe with a weak menu
might filter out only a small proportion of the incorrect settings.
Desch, for example, feared that typical menus would force analysts to
comb through a third of a million possibilities after a run of the 336
Bombes to locate the setting that was the true Enigma key.loz

\(U) Using analysts to search for Enigma settings was time-consuming and
expensive. Tests




took from seconds to hours, and some of them demanded skilled if not
just very devoted personnel. From the list of combinations that were not
eliminated by the Bombes, analysts used other machines and hand methods
to see which was the unique one that produced plain text from crib.
Thousands of analysts would be needed if the Bombes did not eliminate
all but a very few of the Enigma settings.

-(S\>To be useful the Bombes had to eliminate more than just those
combinations that could not possibly have produced the crib-plain
combination; they had to filter those that were unlikely to have done
so. The only valuable pay-off from the use of the Bombes was a very
short list of very likely \"keys.\" Unless the list was short, there
would be no significant savings in time and manpower.

£¥Sf The only way to that short list was through the location of long
and accurate cribs and the creation of powerful \"menus.\" Starting with
relatively long cribs, a menu was built through searching for letter
combinations and connections (closures) between plain and cipher that
would allow the Bombe\'s circuits to differentiate \"chance\"
relationships from those that were caused by the true Enigma setting.

(T0//ai) By mid-1942 GC&CS\'s wizards had turned menuing into a
mathematical art. They had discovered much since Turing\'s first
insights. They had tables showing what types of menus were needed to
produce the desired short lists; they found that wisely selected cribs
reduced the need to run all thirty-two of the Enigmas in their Bombes;
they could calculate how many timeconsuming machine stop and circuit
checks would be expected per menu; and they could predict how many
possible wheel order and stecker settings would be printed per run.

(•\^ES} Strong menus were a necessity. Otherwise, the Bombes might stop
their wheels and demand a return to the possible \"hit\" position

so frequently that runs would take several hours.103

(S\#SI) The British had also learned how counterproductive it was to run
the Bombes without having 100 percent accurate cribs (a goal that called
for avast infrastructure) that yielded robust menus. They reserved their
Bombes for menus that would produce no more than a handful of
\"stories\" per run. By mid-1942 they had learned how to select fifteen
letter cribs that prevented the Bombes from stopping more than a dozen
times and printing more than five possibly true \"settings\" during a
run. When the Germans made the mistake of providing excellent cribs, the
Bombe could identify \"the\" and only \"the\" setting.104

(S//SI\>But Desch and the Americans had not learned enough about cribs
and menus by September to envision or wait for Bombes that would point
to only a handful of possible solutions. In September Joseph Desch
estimated that his ultra-high-speed Bombes would take, using typical
menus, thirteen and one-half hours to test one wheel order on one Bombe.
The reason: He calculated that a Bombe would have to stop 3,000 times
per run, perform its circuit tests, and then decide whether or not to
print its declaration that it had found a highly probable solution. On
the average, Desch estimated, the Bombe would suggest that one of three
stops had found awheel order that should be tested by an analyst.105

(S} If, as envisioned in early fall 1942, \"G\" was to run its 336
machines simultaneously and continuously, the Bombes would spew out some
300,000 \"probable\" settings twice a day. How \"G\" was to wade through
all that was not divulged.

(S3 Even with the use of the best possible menus, Desch\'s Bombes seemed
to demand great manpower investments for the production of timely
intelligence. The navy\'s commitment to becoming a partner in Ultra is
underscored by the





acceptance of the consequences of Desch\'s most optimistic menu
scenario. After consulting with OP-20-G\'s Enigma expert, Lieutenant
Ely, Desch held out some hope that \"G\" would eventually be able to
provide menus that would cut each machine\'s running time to three hours
and the number of its stop-rewind sequences to less than 700 per run,
per machine. That meant that \"G\'s\" experts would need to test some
40,000 prints each day.106

\^-The Americans were desperate. They accepted the Bombe program despite
Desch\'s estimates. They were willing to invest millions in hardware and
more in manpower for a system that was very inefficient. Despite
Desch\'s estimates of how long the Bombes would take to produce so few
results, his report on the design of the American Bombe was quickly
approved.107

\(U) The Cousins Will Have Their Way\...to A Degree

\(U) Although they questioned the ability of \"G\" and its engineers to
build a significant number of Bombes and to devise the menus needed for
them, the British had no choice but to take \"G\" seriously and to make
the best of the situation. They quickly dispatched another cryptologic
delegation to the United States.

(0//0I) Accepting what seemed to be the inevitable, GC&CS agreed to help
the Americans. But they continued to argue that European intelligence
should be left to them. The British explained more of their methods of
avoiding the need to run all the Bombe\'s wheel combinations and orders
to test a message. They dropped hints that \"G\" could expect a steady
flow of valuable cribs and solutions.

4S//B¥) The British seemed to be even more generous when they agreed to
a new arrangement in the Pacific. But they gave up very little and
gained much by allowing OP-20-G to run the cryptanalytic and intercept
operations in the area.

(S//Sr) In exchange for Britain closing down some minor centers and
allowing the Americans to direct the codebreakers in Australia, the
American Navy promised to send, if practical, all raw and processed
information about the Pacific to the British. Given how few resources
Britain had in the region, it gained more than it relinquished.

t&ffST) The Americans offered even more. They volunteered to provide
GC&CS with copies of \"G\'s\" newest RAM devices and to train its
technicians in their use.108

(S//&I) In contrast, the Americans obtained much less than they hoped
for in the Atlantic. It was agreed that the British would accede \"to
U.S. desires with regard to work on the German submarine and naval
problem,\" but Britain, in effect, would be \"the coordinating head in
the Atlantic theater as the U.S. will be in the Pacific.\"

(S//S+) The previous pledge to give \"G\" advice on analytical machinery
was reaffirmed, and it was agreed \"in principle\" that Britain would
collaborate with \"G\" and send needed cribs, menus, and intercepts as
long as the security of Ultra was not endangered.109

(S//S\*) In response to Britain\'s bowing-out in the Pacific, to its
providing more knowledge of Bombe techniques, and to its obvious
determination to keep control of the European Ultra, the Americans
tentatively agreed to build only one hundred Bombes.\"0

(S3 One hundred in this case meant a total of 100 four-wheel Enigma
analogs, in contrast to the Desch plan to have 100 racks with three
Bombes each.

(TS//6I) They also agreed to keep their Bombe design very fluid so they
could respond to emergencies. \"G\'s\" technicians were also made aware
they might be asked to play a backup role for GC&CS. Like the rest of
Britain\'s military,




TOP QCCRCTOOOMINTORCL TO U3A, AU3, GAM, QDR AND NZU/Xt

GC&CS began to think it could depend upon America\'s industrial
capabilities. In late 1942 there were indications it might be forced to.
\"Doc\" Keen\'s factories were stretched beyond their limits. America
would be needed to handle cryptanalytic machine emergencies.1\"

\(U) \"G\" seemed ready to accept that role. It also did not reject
Britain\'s suggestion that all Ultra-based naval actions be coordinated
ones. There certainly was no hesitation when GC&CS asked the navy for a
firm pledge to do everything needed to make Ultra America\'s most
guarded secret.11\"

\(U) The October 1942 negotiations did lead to Britain giving \"M\" a
somewhat greater operational role, or at least preparing them for one.
GC&CS\'s representatives set \"M\'s\" men to using hand methods on
various German systems and gave them more instructions on how to prepare
menus (setups) for the Bombes.\"3 During the next few months more and
more technical details about Ultra flowed to the United States, and more
ofEngstrom\'s bright young men in\"M\" traveled to England to work at
GC&CS. But the British retained the power to decide what information
would and would not leave Bletchley Park.114

\(U) A Long Apprenticeship

(TS//SI) A year after the October 1942 agreement, at the end of 1943,
\"G\" remained an appendage to Britain\'s European Ultra. In November
Howard Engstrom traveled to England to hear something quite like a
lecture about \"M\" wasting valuable resources by running the Bombes on
very weak American-devised menus. He had to agree to a return to using
British cribs and menus. It was not until much later in 1944, after
\"M\" had enough good intercepts, and after its cryptanalysts had honed
their menuing skills, that \"M\" was granted effective independence
concerning the Atlantic U-boat problem.\"5

\(U) It took a long time for \"G\'s\* men to gain the necessary skills
and to build an effective antiEnigma organization. There was progress,
but it came slowly. In early 1943 American cryptanalysts were applying
GC&CS paper and tabulating machine techniques to crack some German
messages intercepted by the British.

(TS//SI) But most of the first half of 1943 was a long practice session
for the Americans. Using GC&CS-supplied keys, they deciphered and
analyzed the large American backlog of intercepted Atlantic traffic.
Then GC&CS forwarded new messages and their keys.

■£T0//3fi To aid the deciphering process, the navy\'s men in Washington
built anew electromechanical device, the M8. The M8 was not an
analytical machine, but soon after its appearance in October 1942 it
became an invaluable tool for \"G\'s\" analysts. More refined models
began to appear in spring 1943. The M8s were reworked versions of the
Americans\' own automatic wheelbased encryption machine, the ECM. The
navy yard\'s engineers added a plugboard, Enigma wheels and Letterwriter
equipment to turn the ECM into an automatic and relatively high-speed
\"translation\" machine. Once the wheels and plugboard were set, the
\"stories\" from the Bombes could be rapidly tested, or entire messages
could be deciphered at rates up to 600 letters per minute. A few months
later the M9, another simple Enigma analog, appeared. The M9 was a very
sparse combination of wheels and plugboard that was extremely useful
once the Bombes were in operation. An M9 was later placed near every set
of Bombes, allowing their operators to make immediate checks of
printouts and to locate missing Enigma plugboard settings.\"6

CTS//6D But much of the American Ultra effort of 1942 and 1943 proceeded
without the help of automation. Enormous human resources were put into a
paper version of a bombe: a 1,000,000-page catalog that could be used to





drag a short crib through wheel settings to find possible Enigma
keys.\"7

\(U) In late 1942 Alan Turing began a series of visits to America telling
\"M\" more about Ultra and the construction efforts on the latest
British Bombe.\"8 The two nations\' intelligence services and the two
Bombe projects became closer as 1942 ended. But Desch\'s Bombe was an
American product.\"9

■6S) By the time he received adequate information about Wynn-William\'s
work and that of \"Doc\" Keen on his four-wheel \"Mammoth\" Bombe, Desch
had his design relatively fixed.120 He was convinced that the automatic
rewind feature was essential, and he did not wish to halt his work while
the British proved that all \"hit\" circuit tests could be done without
rewinding the wheels. He was convinced that his steel shafts would be
more reliable than belt drives and that menu setting should be done with
a set of switches rather than clusters of hand-inserted Jones plugs.

\(U) Desch and his NCR men and the young engineers in John Howard\'s
\"M\" group took the very heavy responsibility of creating a unique
machine and a path-breaking production line to defeat the U-boats.121

\(U) Desch Takes Charge

\(U) As soon as his general design was approved in September 1942, Desch
began to refine his ideas and looked forward to immediately building a
prototype.122 At the same time, the old engineering group from MIT was
ordered to put the other OP-20-G machine projects on hold until the
critical Bombes were ready. Financing was not a problem, and the second
American Bombe project, which atone point would employ over 1,000
manufacturing workers, received the highest priorities for personnel and
material. The Bombe project had its own building in Dayton with armed
Marines and spe

cial secret rooms to manufacture Bombes.

and use the

\(U) Wenger Gets His Organization

\(U) The Bombe was so important that the Bureau of Ships had to grant all
the wishes of Wenger, Engstrom, and Desch. OP-20-G was able to convince
the Bureau to create a new administrative organization for all the
high-speed machine projects: the Naval Computing Machine Laboratory
(NCML) at Dayton, Ohio. Informal terms the Bureau\'s NCML was the boss
of the Dayton work, but by early 1943 it was really a support
organization for OP-20-G\'s group of engineers and scientists.

\(U) The \"M\" group was also gaining power. The country\'s best
mathematicians, physicists, and engineers were brought into OP-20-GM.
That allowed Engstrom to have a self-contained machine development group
that easily challenged the Bureau\'s technical authority. Of importance
to the nature of the postwar RAM program, the \"M\" engineers were
integrated with the NCR workforce. That gave the machine designers the
freedom to merge research and production and, combined with the virtual
takeover of NCR, it allowed Wenger a constant interaction with and power
over the manufacturing process.

\(U) Of Tires and Transmissions and a Disappearing Laboratory

\(U) Such freedom and the massive resources the navy was willing to pour
into Desch\'s project were not enough to sustain the hopes of September
and October 1942, however. At the opening of 1943 a prototype of his
Bombe had not been assembled, and there were serious questions about the
practicality of the components that had been constructed.123 The
rejection of the plan for an electronic machine and the reversion to the
electromechanical technology of the British Bombes had not led to the
easy solutions \"G\" had




expected. The Bombe and Rapid Machine projects were in trouble again.

(0//SI) Joseph Desch\'s first designs had called for a Bombe that was a
close analog of the Enigma, but it was to be a very, very fast one.
There were to be more than twenty sets of four wheels each in a Bombe.
Each of the four wheels was to be of the same size and was to be
constructed out of typical materials of the era. The Bombe\'s
commutators were to be made of either hard rubber or Bakelite, standard
insulated housings of the 1940s.

\(U) Inserted within the inner face of those wheels were rather large
copper contact bars. Joe Desch knew he would have to make them of
special lengths and shapes to prevent spurious electrical contacts from
being registered as \"hits.\"

(S//SI) The fastest of the four wheels was to spin around more than
sixty times a second. That rate of speed seemed essential. And also
essential was the complex gearing that would be required to pace the
movement of the slower commutators. The gearing requirements included
the difficult-to-machine-and-maintain Geneva gears and a stepping
control system that reminded one experienced engineer of the complexity
of the recently invented automatic transmissions for automobiles.124

(G//0I) Although a challenge, the group at NCR had few doubts about
creating the Bombe. September\'s optimism about such mechanical and
electrical parts did not last long, however. The first serious
disappointment came quite soon. It was found that the commutators could
not tolerate such high speeds. The fast wheels were blowing apart. The
problem could not be overcome, Desch concluded, so he significantly
altered the design of the Bombe.

(S//SI) By December he envisioned a machine that would have two small
\"fast\" wheels. The smaller wheels, he hoped, would rotate at

least at 1,800 rpm without disintegrating. Soon he had to admit to other
problems. He warned Engstrom that the commutators might not be
interchangeable from Bombe to Bombe. Production difficulties might cause
something worse. The commutators, Desch said, might have to be
permanently attached on each spindle.125

(TS//SI) The decision to create a Bombe with two fast wheels created
near panic in Washington. Since any of the Enigma wheels might be
assigned the \"fast\" position, each of the eight known Enigma
commutators would have to be cloned by two, not one Bombe commutator.
Howard Engstrom let Desch know in the strongest terms that he
disapproved of the twowheel design. It would create a logistics
nightmare, wrote Engstrom. More than 40,000 or 50,000 ofthe expensive
commutators would have to be immediately stockpiled and made available
for use. If the Germans altered the wiring on their wheels or added new
ones, no manufacturer could respond quickly enough to produce the new
wheels.126

\(U) Desch promised that he would do his best to make the wheels
interchangeable from Bombe to Bombe, but he could not guarantee that he
could produce a Bombe of any significant speed without the dual fast
wheel feature.

CT0//0E) Then a very great gamble was made. Washington declared that a
solution be found. The American Bombe would have only one size wheel!
Desch and his men had their orders, but no solutions. They began an
intensive search. Their reward was disappointment. Prototype after
prototype kept disintegrating when put at the high-speed position even
when the revolutions per minute were reduced to less than half than
originally planned.

■£T\$//SI)-The answer eluded everyone. It was not until some ofthe young
officers stationed at NCR realized the similarities between the
commutator\'s problems and those of automobile tires





that there was a glimpse of hope. How were tires able to hold together
during auto races? The answer seemed to lie in a new product, rayon. The
officers learned that webs constructed from it were being used to
reinforce new types of rubber tires.

(TQ//3I) There were visits to local tire companies and some tests. The
situation appeared hopeful, but no one was sure that the experiments
could be translated into a mass production system for the
commutators.127

£TS//GF)- Because they had no choice, Desch\'s team went ahead with the
rest of the Bombe project while they waited for word about the
commutators. As they did, they confronted another problem whose solution
was also tied to the automobile industry.

fflS//Sfl The gearing system for the Bombe proved more complex and
temperamental than expected. No one seemed able to correctly align the
components. Finally, the more senior engineers asked some of the younger
men in Dayton if they had any experiences with gearboxes. One, whose
engineer father had worked for Tom Edison, had some hands-on experience
with the new automatic transmissions. When he examined the Bombes, he
saw much that related to his previous experience. He volunteered to try
to solve the gear assembly problems.128

(TS//SI) There was another important problem with the Bombes that almost
halted development. Desch had rejected the idea for a fully electronic
bombe, but had no alternative other than to rely upon electronics for
many parts of his 1942 device.

(TS//SI) Desch\'s September design suggested a need for perhaps as many
as 1,500 tubes in relatively complex circuits. The fast diagonal board
to test for stecker settings might call for over

1,000 tubes. Given the size of tubes of the early 1940s and the heat
they generated, an alternative to off-the-shelf technology had to be
found. Desch\'s past experience led him to believe that small
multipurpose tubes might be created. He made some attempts to refine his
previous designs, but his many other responsibilities pulled him away
from the needed solution. He had to have help. Fortunately, the NCR
project had such high priority and such vast resources that one of the
nation\'s leading tube experts could be summoned to Ohio and allowed to
order everything he needed to create an advanced laboratory. His work
proved successful, and he was able to deliver the specifications to
manufacturers for the special tube. It was a tiny four-in-one tube that
became the basis for the ultra-fast diagonal board. It would be produced
in carload lots, and it reduced the number of separate tubes in the
Bombes to fewer than 500.129

\(U) While the \"G\" group waited for the solutions to the commutator,
gearing, and tube problems, they faced a very chilling possibility. For
a time, some in \"M\" worried that their opportunity had been lost
because GC&CS was able to reenter the Atlantic U-boat system at the
beginning of 1943 without the use of any four-wheel Bombes. The reentry
came through the capture of documents from a U-boat and the discovery of
some very sloppy procedures on the Shark network. As a consequence, the
British were able to read the four-wheel Enigma messages using their old
Bombes and hand techniques.

\(U) But the British and the Americans soon realized how temporary the
new solution was. As the spring U-boat offensive opened, the Germans
changed some of their codes and tightened up their procedures so that
the Allies were again shut out ofthe submarine systems. They remained
blind for a frightening ten days during what became the worst month in
the history ofthe battle ofthe Atlantic




\(U) Samng the American Bombe

\(U) At least three months before that ghastly March 1943 U-boat
slaughter, OP-20-G realized that Desch\'s machine was in serious
trouble. Pressure was put on the staff at NCR to work overtime. Joe
Desch was told to drop his many other electronics projects for the NDRC,
Aberdeen, and the army. And the navy went over the head of the new
president of NCR and wrote directly to Colonel Deeds to make sure that
NCR gave the Bombe project all it needed. Under prodding from the Chief
of Naval Operations, Deeds quickly ordered Dayton to devote less time to
its other and more profitable war work and give the Bombe all of its
attention.130

(T8//SI3The first design for the pilot model of the Bombe was submitted
in January. Joe Desch and John Howard responded to British suggestions
and incorporated them in a second design even as they rushed to
construct the first prototype. But the men in Dayton were not keeping
pace with the war.131 As the great Atlantic battle began in March, all
that had emerged from some seven months of work were two wheezy
prototype machines.

CES//Sff Their commutator racks sat on sawhorses, and their other
components were scattered around the workroom, connected by scores of
wires that were soaked with the oil that flowed out of their drive
shafts\' housings. Their commutators continued their obstinacy, and the
crew of engineers endured repetitions of lowering the fast wheels\'
\"rpm,\" then having to dodge their fragments as they splintered. No one
was sure that the two models, Adam and Eve, would prove themselves and
serve as test beds for the vital production machines. Nonetheless,
Washington decided it could wait no longer and in early April Desch
committed to a final design for the production version of the American
Bombe although he was not sure that it would work.132

\(U) There was progress at Dayton during April and May, but no machines!
The group at NCR could not even tempt the two Bombe prototypes to run
for more than a few inadequate minutes. Fortunately, escort carriers,
airborne radar, a central command center for subhunting (the Tenth
Fleet), and changes in the once vulnerable Allied convoy codes began to
bring the Atiantic under control. Enigma cracking played its part, but
not through the promised American technological wonders, the Bombes.

\(U) A Bombe Too Lale

\(U) Order was restored in the Atiantic before the first American Bombe
was even put to its tests. The problems in the Atlantic and the coming
European offensives called for another readjustment in the rules for
cooperation in the intelligence field. The BRUSA agreement made the
United States Army a partner in the Ultra Secret, but a very junior one.
OP-20-G and the United States Army again agreed to focus on the Japanese
problems and to allow GC&CS to determine what the Americans would do or
would not do against the Enigma and Fish systems.

\(U) As the mid-May 1943 negotiations came to a close, Joseph Wenger
remained unsure of OP-20-G\'s future. Even if \"G\" was too late to be
the savior of the Atiantic, there was still much to do to counter the
U-boats. The German Army, Air Force, rocket development team, and police
agencies showed signs of changing over to four-wheel Enigmas. And, in
the systems continuing to use the three-wheel machines, anticipated
alterations in procedures and in the use of their plugboards threatened
another round of crises. If the American Bombes could be made to work,
they still might play a significant role.

\(U) In late May Wenger ordered Desch to allow the two temperamental
prototypes to be used on messages sent from Washington. The results were
to be forwarded to the British as





examples of American abilities.133 Howard Engstrom, in charge of the new
Enigma message work, felt defeated when Adam and Eve refused to run for
more than a few hours without spurting oil or developing incurable cases
of faulty electrical contacts.134

\(U) A Program Based on Another Technological Bet

\(U) Adam and Eve continued their tantrums as June approached,135 and the
production model was yet to be assembled. The tension mounted when it
was learned that as Dayton again faltered, Britain completed its first
four-wheel Bombe, put its first tape and electronic Robinson to use, and
began the construction of the advanced electronic COLOSSUS.136

\(U) Adam and Eve, the prototypes, were in too much trouble and were too
vital to working out critical technical problems to be used by the
cryptanalysts in Washington. Desch\'s crew and Howard\'s NCML engineers
put in longer hours using Adam and Eve to unravel the problems with the
parts for the production machines. The commutators were reworked and the
drive-mechanisms altered.137 By mid-June there were hopes that all the
problems had been conquered.

\(U) However, the production crew had still not released the first two
copies ofthe final model, Cain and Abel. Desch pushed his people harder,
and the NCR factory began to assemble components at an even faster pace.
They could only hope the parts would function when put together in the
Bombe.

\(U) July 26: a Day of Defeat

\(U) It took Joe Desch another month to send the first two production
models to the test floor.138 Then he was able to have thirteen more
ofthe new Bombes assembled by the last week of July, but none would
work!139 July 26,1943, was a critical day in the history ofOP-20-G and
the

NCML. At the very last minute, Desch made a discovery that revived hope.
Running the Bombe\'s Bakelite code wheels at extreme speeds was again
causing invisible distortions leading to false electrical contacts.
Desch predicted that careful storage, handling, and refurbishing would
solve the problem.140 Apparently, Desch had replaced the small fast
wheel on the first prototypes with ones the same size as the others to
please Engstrom. Again, his judgment was trusted. The wheels were
reworked and production was resumed based on his hope that the
last-minute modifications would provide a permanent cure.

\(U) A Victory, a Bit Too Late

\(U) Despite all the false starts, delays and problems, Desch built one
ofthe most complex machines in the world. The 1943 Dayton Bombe was a
seven-foot-high, eight-foot-long, two-footwide and 5,000-pound marvel.
It housed sixteen four-wheel sets of Enigma analogs and the Welchman
diagonal board. Its sixty-four doubleEnigma wheel commutators each
contained 104 contact points, which had to be perfectly aligned when
they touched the copper and silver sensing brushes. Such alignment and
synchronization were difficult to achieve, especially for the fast
wheel. The achievement was more remarkable because Desch was able to
keep his promise of making the commutators interchangeable.

\(U) There had been some compromises in order to convince the machine to
work. It was much slower than hoped for. Fewer than 2,000 revolutions a
minute had to be accepted because even the reinforced commutators could
not stand up to higher speed. And running the Bombe\'s main shaft even
at the lower \"rpm\" without creating the sparks and short circuits that
ruined a test continued to be a problem.

(TS//SI) It was quite embarrassing to have had to install a conduit
system under the machine to catch the oil that was sprayed on the main
shaft to keep it from overheating. And the engineers




did not like the idea of having to pour a quart or so of oil into the
machines every day.141

(TS//8I) There had been some other compromises. The NCR devices did not
incorporate a means of producing irregular stepping of the slower
wheels, and the summer 1943 Bombes were not the compact three complete
units-perframe devices Desch had sketched in the previous year. Trying
to balance the engineering demands with cryptologic power had led to the
Bombes being composed of sixteen, not twenty, units, and having only one
Bombe per frame.

(TS//0I) Sixteen \"Enigmas,\" one diagonal board, and fewer testing
circuits made the American Bombes much less discriminating than the new
British ones (thirty-six Enigmas and two boards); but Desch\'s Bombes
were much more reliable and needed remarkably little maintenance once
they were broken in.1\*2

(T9//0I) Although Desch\'s model was based on the logic, parallel
architecture, and hardware

of the British Bombe, his machine was an original. The truly distinctive
part of Desch\'s machine was its electronics.

(TS//SI) He did not rely upon the designs of the new Keen Bombe, the
Mammoth, nor did he copy Wynn-Williams\' ideas.143

(TS//6I) Although Wynn-Williams\' partially electronic machine, the
Cobra, was more sophisticated in some ways than Desch\'s, Desch\'s was
more effective. Wynn-Williams\' device printed solutions on the fly, but
it proved somewhat unreliable. Desch\'s Bombe also proved more
trustworthy than Keen\'s latest electromechanical one.144

(T6//83 Desch was forced to bow to some other technological limits since
his Bombes contained sixteen not twenty-four (or, like the British
machines, over thirty) Enigma analogs. Each of the sixteen units was
housed in a separate rack, which took up as much space as the
three-perrack configuration that had been the goal in September 1942.

::: {style="width: 9.88235294117647%;"}
:::

::: {style="width: 19.137254901960784%;"}
:::

(TG//SI) Boifoe

(TS//SI) Although the American Bombes did their jobs, they could not use
long and discriminating cribs of more than sixteen letters, as could the
British devices. Desch had balanced his understanding of the power of
short cribs against the mechanical difficulties of driving a large
number of commutators.U5

(TS//SI) The information about cribs and menus that had been revealed
after October 1942 also helped Desch decide against attempting to
incorporate a helpful but challenging feature; automatic slow-wheel
turnover. Desch did not build a means of kick




ing the slower wheels to a new position relative to its mates after a
faster wheel had completed a full revolution. Relying upon the
probabilities that hits could be discovered before the fast wheel
reached the point where the next wheel should be pushed ahead one or
more letters, hand-setting of displacements during the commutator setup,
and the use of a two-part menu allowed the Bombe design to remain
manageable.1\*6

(T8//BI) However, this meant that when \"hoppity\" menus (fast-wheel
turnover positions known) were run, the Bombe operators had to stop the
machines, then reset wheel positions by hand and restart the Bombe.147

\(U) Ignorant No More

\(U) However, with the help of his electronic memory system and the
maturation oPG\'s\" Enigma cryptanalytic skills, Desch came very close
to achieving all the hopes for the American Bombe.

(TS//SI) Because of his engineering skills and the use of strong menus,
the NCR Bombe took twenty, not fifty, nor the worst case, 380 minutes,
for a run. A major reason was that the British cryptanalysts (and later
\"G\'s\" experts) were able to supply menus that produced on the average
five- or so prints or \"stories\" per run -not 40,000.\*-\* The menus
eliminated so many of the possibilities that the Bombes stopped,
rewound, and restarted very infrequently. That saved significant amounts
of time.

6RB/SI) In terms of raw speed, Desch\'s 1943 machine was 200 times
faster than the Polish Bomba, at least twenty times faster than the
Turing Bombe, and at least thirty percent faster than Britain\'s 1943
four-wheel Bombe.149 His machine was able to run either three-or
fourwheel tests.

(TO//OI) As important for the success of the NCR Bombes were the menus
for them.

Unfortunately, it took the Americans many, many additional months before
they learned how to consistently supply \"strong\" menus. Fortunately,
by late summer 1943 the British were willing to wire cribs and other
Bombe instructions directly to \"G\'s\" Washington headquarters. They
forwarded them as soon as they located the reencodements and other
German procedural errors that were allowing them into the Shark
system.150

\(U) The Bombes at Work

\(U) Desch\'s manufacturing techniques gained the respect of the once
skeptical British. By midNovember Washington had over fifty bombes in
operation and thirty more on site, 151 The American navy finally began
to be a truly productive Ultra member. By the end of the year, the first
contract was completed,lsa and Engstrom began to turn his crews to other
technical and cryptanalytic problems.

\(U) Although the second American Bombe project, from the first
investigations to the last delivery, took almost a year longer than
expected, Desch and OP-20-G received applause, not criticism, in late
1943.153 Asa result of Dayton\'s achievement, the British found it
impossible to continue on with a condescending attitude. The Americans
soon became the guardians of the Uboat work, and Britain felt confident
enough to concentrate on the Fish system and German army traffic.154
From mid-1943 to the end of the war, M4 was open to America and
Britain.155

\(U) But the American Bombes were born a bit too late. By the time the
Washington center received its machines, the four-wheel U-boat traffic
was light.

(TS//8fj Or at least the British thought so. They complained that the
Americans were running their precious Bombes against low-priority

messages and were using menus that were highly unlikely to produce a
break. They more than suggested that Engstrom should agree to a true


Pagt 111



\"sharing\" of Bombe resources. They wanted the American navy to run
important German air force and army problems and to help with the
\"European\" part of the war.156

(Tfl//(g\> Productive work was found for the more than one hundred
American machines. The navy\'s men soon began the analysis of other
German Enigma systems. Although somewhat worried about breaching the
agreement with Friedman\'s American army group, OP-20-G took on much
German three-wheel air force work.157

Q£8d By autumn 1944,60 percent of the navy\'s Bombe time was devoted to
German air force and army problems as presented by the British.158
OP-20-G contributed more to the non-naval work. After rejecting a
British plea to quickly construct another fifty Bombes and complaining
that England had not contributed enough to the fourwheel effort, NCR
built another two dozen Bombes. The new machines were somewhat more
sophisticated than the first version.159 Britain did place more and more
responsibility for fourwheel bombes on the Americans, even announcing at
one point that Keen would return to building three-wheel machines. The
second series of American Bombes had a \"double input\" feature that
eliminated more false hits.

\(U) In addition to constructing the new Bombes, NCR built a series of
attachments for them and the older machines. As well, they put into use
other devices needed to automate the final steps in identifying Enigma
keys.

(TS//SD An Enigma attack was aimed at discovering seven things about an
Enigma setup:

1\. Rotor wiring

2\. Reflector plugging

3\. Stecker setting

4\. Rotor order

5\. Window setting (starting point)

6\. Ring or core setting

7\. Notch pattern (turnovers)

160

(TS//SIJ- Given a strong crib of about sixteen letters, knowledge of the
rotor wiring, a correct guess as to the reflector\'s plugging and a
large number of Bombes, analysts could expect to get back some very good
indications of the stecker setting, the rotor order, and some indirect
help on the window setting, the ring setting, and the notch pattern. The
Bombe was a relatively strong and quick means for a solution. But it
needed some help.

\(U) More to It Than the Bombe

\(U) The Bombe was a powerful anti-Enigma tool, but by itself could not
yield all that needed to be known about Enigma settings. On the other
hand, it was, in some contexts, an example of overkill. When several
elements of an Enigma setting were already known, other machines were
much more efficient.

161

(3S-) For example, Hypo, the microfilm machine that had been constructed
so that a pure statistical attack could be mounted against the Enigma,
was called into service as a \"locator.\"

(3S//SF) When the Bombes had done their jobs and the rotor order and
wiring, the stecker, and the Uncle Walter were known, Hypo was used to
find the window setting through a letter frequency test.162 Hypo helped
in certain tough cases, but it took a great deal of time. Developing its
film took forty minutes, and a \"three-wheel\" Hypo test took seventy
minutes. And Hypo demanded humidity- and light-controlled rooms.163

(C//8T) The navy group at NCR found a faster way to handle such tasks.
They built electrical attachments for the Bombes. These \"Grenades\"
were large panels containing pluggable switch banks, which were used to
control the Bombes. Their most frequent applications called for only a
few of the sixteen banks on a Bombe and ran very




TOP SECRFT/fCOMIMT//REL TO UGA, AUG, OAN, ODR AMD HZU/X1

quickly. In most instances a Grenade run took fifty seconds.164

(T0//0I) There were many varieties of Grenades. One of the firsts was
for the window settings when the other Enigma crypto-variables were
known. Mrs. Driscoll had outlined the logic for the first American
Grenade to John Howard a month before the Bombe project had been
approved in September 1942. He implemented those ideas in the technology
of the Bombes as well as in the film machines.165

CES//S1) The Driscoll-Howard Standard Grenades appeared as soon as the
Bombes came into operation. They were a great help because they reduced
the effort needed to identify the window settings for succeeding
messages once the Bombes had found the daily key. With the known daily
key, all that was needed was a short four- or five-letter crib.

(TS//SI) The usefulness of the Standard Grenades was increased when
\"G\" discovered how to put them to exploiting German errors such as
selecting wheel orders in a \"Cilly\" or nonrandom way. The Standard was
also helpful in discovering why certain messages would not yield to the
regular Bombe attack. The Grenades became a major way of exploring such
\"dud\" messages.166 The Standard became a necessity at \"G,\" and one
was built into each of the second, 1944, models of the Bombes.167

(TS//SI) Once \"G\'s\" men had the opportunity, they began to build a
series of additional Grenades; each provided an efficient solution to a
particular Enigma problem, and each extended the power of the Bombes.

CTO//0I) The Parallel Grenade allowed four short cribs to be used
simultaneously to find the window settings. The Drag Grenade went
further. It tested the four cribs, position by position, against a
sixteen-letter cipher text. Its sister, the Polygrenade, was more
powerful. It dragged the

crib twenty-six positions at a time. The simpler Jones Dudbuster
imitated the large paper catalogs by dragging a common word such as
\"eins\" through the text

168

QfOf/OlfThe Sliding Grenades expanded the Bombe\'s power by handling
those Enigmas with rotating reflector wheels. The Pluggable-Series
Grenade was quite clever; it found the wheel order and ring setting for
traffic produced using a double indicator.169

(T0//0I) The most impressive of the Grenades was the Universal
Plugboard. It was so flexible that it was used to explore many different
ideas. Its main operational use was to try up to twenty-six cribs over
thirteen letters - quite an imaginative use of plugs and wires.

(TS//SI) Some of the Grenades were asked to solve more complex problems.
To do so they used all of a Bombe or two Bombes lashed together. The
Query found settings from the indicators on the messages. The Cilly
automated the exploitation of nonrandom selection of part of a message
setting.170

(TS//SI) Electronic devices were also used to make the Bombes more
effective. Tube circuits were added to the first (N530) Bombes to
compensate for weak menus that were producing too many stops. That
Self-Detector was a set of the special four-in-one tubes attached to the
original diagonal board. It suppressed stops that did not have a
particular diagonal board connection: a letter connected to itself, that
is, unsteckered. Statistical analyses had shown that it was very
unlikely that a stop without such a connection would lead to the
unraveling of an Enigma key.171

(T6//0I) The electronic Squelcher incorporated a more general test to
eliminate stops unlikely to produce key. It was a substitute for the
original electronic amplifier system in the N530 Bombes. It was
conceived when the worries about weak menus were intense. Once the
Americans learned

TOP BECnET/ZGOMINT/mCL TO UCA, AUG, CAM, ODR AND HZL//X1




the tricks of menu building, they decided that only a few of their old
Bombes needed to have the Squelchers.m

\(U) The success of Grenades and Squelcher circuits were only two of the
indicators that Engstrom\'s group was beginning to overcome the chaos of
1942 and early 1943, By the fall of 1943 things were going much, much
better for Wenger\'s dreams for a permanent RAM program. In addition to
the Bombes, OP-20-G finally began to receive the Gray-NCR and the
Eastman machines. The first of the new Bush Comparators was put into
operation in September. The new Comparator had a somewhat rocky career,
however. When it arrived in Washington, it had several flaws, including
the incompatibility of its major components; incorrect specifications
had been sent to the contractors. It also proved to be much slower than
desired. But the complaints about the machine\'s failings were turned to
\"M\'s\" advantage. The critics were assured that placing the next
developments in the hands of the OP-20GNCML group would prevent such
mistakes.173 The failings ofEastman-Kodak\'s devices were also used as
arguments for an expansion of \"G\'s\" own research and development.174
All in all, by January 1944, OP-20-G\'s RAM group seemed vindicated and
ready to return to the extension of the microfilm and digital electronic
technologies. Some hoped there would be time to search for a
general-purpose cryptanalytic machine, one that went beyond the Bush
Comparator.

Notes

1\. (U) NSA Bombe File, U.S. Navy 0P-20-G/0P20-2, Memo to Station X,
\"Decision regarding future E policy,\" app. May 1942.

2\. (U) Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982),
51.

3.CFS7YM) On the Enigma, (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12OO8) Navy
Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425,
\"The American Attack on the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944.
\[sic\].

4\. CE8//6fl NSA AHA 17580, Telford Taylor to Clarke and Corderman,
\"Early E. History,\" 10.

5\. (15//S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheafley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953, and various years. {TS/f&Q. NSA CCH
\*\'P\" Collection Box CC067, RIP 608, CITS Paper TS-10/E6, \"Enigma
Series Vol. 6, Duenna,\" CNC-OP-20, January 1946.

6.fm NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut Eight,
1939-1945,\" 12. (S) NSA AHA ACC 35701, \"German Communications,\" 11
October 1943.

7\. (U) Jean Stengers, \"La guerre des messages codes, 1930---1945\"
LHisforie,3i(i98i): 19-31. Cipher A. Deavours, and Louis Kruh, Machine
Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech House,
1985), 117.

8.TSWWA AHA ACC 35701, \"German Communications,\" 11 October 1943.

9.CTS//SI) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 175. Thomas Parrish, The Ultra Americans; The United
States\' Role in Breaking the Nazi Code (New York: Stein & Day, 1987),
49. Cipher A. Deavours, and Louis Kruh, Machine Cryptography and Modern
Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech House, 1985), 117. W NSA CCH Series
IV.7.20, A P, Mahon, \"The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945-\" (TS//S1)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, GCCS, \"OP-20-G Contribution.\"

10\. (U) Wladyslaw Kozaczuk, Enigma (Frederick, Md.: University
Publications of America, 1984). Jean Stengers, \"Enigma, the French, the
Poles and the British, 1931-1940,\" in Christopher Andrew and David
Dilks (ed.), The Missing Dimension (London, 1984). Andrew Hodges, Alan
Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 170-175

n\. (TS//8I) NSA AHA 17580, Telford Taylor to Clarke and Corderman,
\"Early E. History.\"

12\. (D) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 176. Some of the Scandinavian nations may have had
sporadic successes against Enigma and Fish, which they shared with
Britain. But the true burden had to be carried by the British.
Cryptologia, 12 (1988): 39\> review ofW. M. Carlgren, Svensk
Underrattelsetjanst 193945, (Stockholm, 1985).


TOP SFrPFTf/CQMIMTf/REL TO UGA, AUE, OAK, ODR AMD HZUIX1



13\. {¥&) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut
Eight, 1939-1945-\"

14\. (U) Alan Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983). A.G. Denniston, \"The Government Code and Cypher School
between the Wars,\" Intelligence and National Security J (1986): 48-69.
Christopher Andrew, Her Majesty\'s Secret Service: The Making of the
British Intelligence Community (New York: Penguin, 1987).

15\. (U) Martin Campbell-Kelly, IC L:A Business and Technical History
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 118. Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six
Story: Breaking the Enigma Codes (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982), 295.
Cipher A. Deavours and Louis Kruh, Machine Cryptography and Modern
Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech House, 1985), 119,124.

16\. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1991),
141. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 233. At one point Turing may have considered building a
film machine for the method rather than using punched overlay sheets. It
would have speeded the search or \"coincidences\" as did Bush\'s
machine. But note that for Banburismus to be effective, captures of
tables of some of the Enigma settings were vital. In 1938, the British
used another statistical test called SAGA It also appears to be the kind
of approach used by Mrs. Driscoll in America.

17\. fFS.) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut
Eight,\" 1939-1945-\"

18\. (Y§) Scritching looked for contradictions produced by assumption,
concerning the settings of a cipher machine. It reduced the number of
possibilities that have to be examined. CHS\#SI) CCH Series XII Z,
\"Army-Navy, Descriptive Dictionary ofCryptologic Terms,\" ASA February,
1947.

19\. (W//SD NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. & C.S. Naval S1GINT. Vol. Ill,
German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.\"

20\. (W//SI) NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. & C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill,
German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.\"

21\. CFSrVSI) NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. & C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill,
German Cryptographic Svstems and Their Solution.\"

22\. (¥S) On other statistical methods, T\^Si\^NSA CCH Series IV, 7.20, A
P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945.\"

23\. (\*FS) Avery readable and complete description of the British Bombe
is found in NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The General Cryptanalytic Branch.\"

24\. (¥9-) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut
Eight, 1939-1945 ■\"

25\. (\*S) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut
Eight, 1939-1945,\" 28.

26\. (¥S//£L) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 176. Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story: Breaking the
Enigma Codes (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982), 295. TrS7yStL NSA AHA ACC
13657, \"G.C. & C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.\"

27\. (U) Such commutator systems had been used in electrical timing
instruments, but Keen did trulycreative work.

28\. CTO//0D NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. & C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill,
German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.\"

29\. (¥S/SlQ Martin Campbell-Kelly, IC L:A Business and Technical History
(Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1989), ll9.\"tW//SI) NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C.
& C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill, German Cryptographic Systems and Their
Solution.\"

30\. (U) There are some different interpretations in Bradley F.Smith\'s,
The Codebreaker\'s War: The Ultra-Magic-Deals (Novato: Presidio Press,
1993). Because of my evidence I remain convinced, for example, that the
Americans took the lead in their Bombe program and that they intended to
produce more than 300 machines. See Smith, 247. 26. F. H. Hinsley,
British Intelligence in the Second World War, Volume II (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 747.

31\. (U) Jurgen Rohwer, The Critical Convoy Battle of March 1943 (London:
Ian Allan, 1977), 240. Nigel West, GCHQ, the Secret Wireless War,
1900-86 (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1986), 201, 210. F. H.
Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World War, vol. Ill, Part I,
(1984), 52.

32\. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert L, Benson, \"The Origin ofU.S.
British Communications: Intelligence Cooperation (1940-41),\" NSA
Cryptologic





Spectrum, 4 (Spring 1944): 5-8. (S) NSA CCH Series II Z, \"History of
GET (TUNNY) Research.\"

33- (U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency,
Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" 017. Louis Kruh,
\"BritishAmerican Cryptanalytic Cooperation and an Unprecedented
Admission by Winston Churchill,\" Cryptologia, 13(1989): 123-134- Nigel
West, GCHQ, 201. F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World
War, Vol. 1 (London: Her Majesty\'s Stationery Office, 1979), 155- NSA
RG457, SRH-197, \"U. S.Navy Communications Intelligence, Organization,
Liaison and Collaboration, 1941-45.\" But both Britain and the Dutch
provided the Americans with intelligence and cryptanalytic help on
Japanese systems earlier than previously thought. See Rear Admiral Edwin
T. Layton, And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway; Breaking the
Secrets (New York: William Morrow, 1985), 206. John W. M, Chapman,
\"Pearl Harbor: The Anglo-Australian Dimension,\" Intelligence and
National Security I( 1989), 451-481. James Rusbridger and Eric Nave,
Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York: Summit Books, 1991).

34\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-141, \"Papers from the Personal Files of Alfred
McCormick, Part 2, March 4, 1944,\" \"Memorandum for General Bissel,
Army-Navy Agreement Regarding Ultra.\" NARA RG457, SRH 152, \"Historical
Review of OP-20-G.

35\. \"{Si NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert L. Benson, \"The Origin ofU.S.
British Communications Intelligence Cooperation (1940-41),\" NSA
Cryptologic Spectrum 4 (Spring 1944), 5-8.

36\. TTSffSI) Lauranee Safford, \"Rhapsody in Purple,\" by Linda
P.Tucker, Cryptologia, 6(1981), 193-229, and 346-367. James Rusbridger
and Eric Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York: Summit Books, 1991).
NSASRH-391, \"U.S.CTS\#S1XNSACCH Series XII Z, \"Washington E Traffic,
Notes on Correspondence\" circa February 1942.

37\. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1991),
235-6. NARA RG457, SRH145, \"Collection of Memoranda on Operations of
SIS Intercept Activities and Dissemination 1942-1945,\" \"Report of the
Technical Mission to England\" April 11, 1941, 002-013. Greg Mellen
(ed.), \"Rhapsody in Purple: A New History of Pearl Harbor byDundas P.

Tucker,\" Cryptologia,6 (1981), 193-228. More balanced views are in Rear
Admiral Edwin T. Layton, And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway:
Breaking the Secrets (New York: William Morrow, 1985) and Edward J.Drea,
MacArthur\'s Ultra (University of Kansas Press, 1992). The Americans did
not give everything to the British, however. NARA RG298, Box 39,
Memorandum ofR. W.Sylvester toL. Terman, April 11,1942, tells Terman not
to disclose any cryptological work to the British. And the Americans
also kept their very important SIGCUM enciphering machine from the
British during much of the war. See NARA RG457, RMA003, May 19,1944,
Memorandum for Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2 from Office of the Chief
Signal Officer.

38\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-27O, \"Army Navy FBI COMINT Agreements of 1942\"
by Robert L. Benson, and the very useful SRH-005, \"Use of CX/MSS
Ultra.\"

39\. \$) NSA CCH Series TVV 10.1, \"Report of the Technical Mission to
England,\" 11-4-1941.

40\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency,
Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems,\" and SRH-145,
\"Collection of Memoranda on Operations of SIS Intercept Activities and
Dissemination 1942-1945,\" \'Report of the Technical Mission to
England\' April 11,1941, 002-013. TTSfm NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12OO8)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425,
\"The American Attack on the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944-
\[sfc\]\*CTS\^ NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-20-G-A, \"American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944.

4i.f8iLaurance Safford, \"Rhapsody in Purple,\" by Dundas P.Tucker,
Cryptologia,6(1981), 193-229, and 346-367. NARA, RG457, SRH-361,
\"History of the Signal Security Agency,\" 259, 261. There is some
reason to believe that Britain did pass on the ways to crack the simpler
1940 German air force systems. NSA RAM File, \"Report to J. N.Wenger,
Capt. USN, Resume of the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World War II,\"
and, J.T. Pendergrass, \"Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed Digital
Computing Machines,\" Top Oecrot; 1946. \"tS\^ NSA CCH Series IV V 10.1,
\"Report of the Technical Mission to England,\" 11-4-1941.

42\. fFS\^ NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16
February 1946. \"TS\^ NSA CCH




I UP SECRCT//COMINT//HCL TO USA, AUS, CAM, ODR AMD NZUX1

Series IV V io.i, \"Report of the Technical Mission to England,\"
11-4-1941. (TS) NSACCH R Collection, Box CCo 66, OP-20-1 to OP-20-GY-A,
7 July 1944, \"American Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems.\"

43\. fFS) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP20-GY-A \"American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944.

44\. fTO//01» NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Washington E Traffic, Notes on
Correspondence\" circa February 1942. CFS) NSA AHAACC 35701 \"History of
the Bornbe Project,\" 16 February 1946.\"

45\. (¥&) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946.

46\. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1991),
237.

47\. (¥S) NSA ARA ACC 35701 \"History ofthe Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946. (TS) NSA CCH Series IV V 10.6, Chief Signal Officer, \"A
Chronology of the Cooperation Between the SSA and the London Office of
GCCS,\" 2 June 1946.

48\. (TS\#SD NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Washington E Traffic, Notes on
Correspondence\" circa February 1942.

49\. (•§) An invaluable document on British-U. S. Army relationships,
NARA RG457, SRH-005, \"Use of CX/MSS Ultra,\" and of equal value,
\"History of 3-US,\" as in John Mendelsohn (ed.), Covert Warfare:
Intelligence, Counterintelligence & Military Deception During the World
War HEra (Garland, 1989). (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger toOP-20,
October 1,1942, \"Collaboration ofU. S.and British radio Intelligence
organizations on Japanese and German projects.\" Robert L. Benson, A
History of U. S. Communications Intelligence during World War II: Policy
and Administration, Center for Cryptologic

History7, NSA 1997

50\. (U) For the complaints by the American army\'s SIS, see NARA RG457,
SRH-361, \"History ofthe Signal Security Agency\" Vol. II. 249-275.

51\. (TS-) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History ofthe Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946. (TS) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A, \"American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944. (S\^NSA CCH series
XII Z,Redman toOP-20, 2-281942, \"British not cooperating.\"

52\. pPS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History ofthe Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946.TTS7V«1\^SA CCH Series XII Z,(Sl2008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944- \[sic\] ffS) NSACCH R
Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A, \"American Cryptanalysis of German
Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944

53\. (3S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Travis toOP-20G, 13 May 1942 - \"Will
Send Bombe to you in August or September.\"

54\. CRS\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, Travis toOP-20G, 13 May 1942 - \"Will
Send Bombe to you in August or September.\"

55- \^SJ Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon, and
Schuster, 1983), 191. Laurance Safford, \"Rhapsody in Purple,\" by
Dundas P. Tucker, Cryptologia, 6 (1982), 216-17. NSA RAM File: OP-20-G
to GC&CS, July 7,1942; OP20-G to OP-20 September 3,1942; J. N. Wenger to
OP-20-GM, August 6,1942 \"We wish to construct\...\"; and Wenger to Ely,
August 5,1942; Engstrom to Meader re Turing visit, January 5,1943. F. H.
Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World War, Vol. 1,56. Joseph
Eachus, letter to the author, March 24, 1989. \"History of 3-US,\" in
John Mendelshon (ed.), Covert Warfare (Garland, 1989), 010-012. ffV/SQ
On the continuing problems, it SIS, OKI) NSA CCH Series IV V10.6, Chief
Signal Officer, \"AChronology ofthe Cooperation Between the SSA and the
London Office of GCCS,\" 2 June 1946. On the August protest by\"G,\"
fES) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History ofthe Bombe Project,\" 16 February
i946ntS)kNSA CCH Series XII Z, Eachus to Wenger, 2 August 1942, \"Full
Wiring Diagram on Way.\" (SJ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger to Op-20-GM, 6
August 1942, \"Nature of E machine.\"

56\. (U) The group at Bletchley Park cracked the new four-wheel system by
December 1942. But the break was not a pure cryptanalytic one. It
depended upon the capture of documents and the continued failure ofthe
German system managers to follow basic security procedures. David Kahn,
Seizing the Enigma (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1991), 111.

57\. (U) Laurance Safford, \"Rhapsody in Purple,\" by Dundas P.Tucker,
Cryptologia, 6 (1982), 193-229, and 346-367.




58\. (U) Even Britain waited what now seems too long to organize its
research. Ronald Clark, Tizard (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1965).

59\. (U) The Coast Guard, which had been in charge of decrypting
rumrunner and other clandestine traffic for years, had as its chief
cryptanalyst William Friedman\'s wife. The clandestine system the Coast
Guard attacked must have been very simple compared to the Enigma.

60\. ffS\^Sl) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12OO8) Navy Dept, Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944. \[sic\] 51, 53e»).NSA CCH R
Collection, Box CCO 66, OP20-GY-A, \"American Cryptanalysis of German
Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944.

61\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-306, \"OP-20-G Exploits and Commendations in
World War II\" 016. NSA RAM File, \"Report to J. M. Wenger, Capt. USN,
Resume of the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World War II,\" and J. T.
Pendergrass, \"Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed Digital Computing
Machines,\" Top Secret, 1946. fPSl NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66,
OP20-GY-A \"American Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,\" 7 July
1944.

62\. CTSt\^SI\] NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. &C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill,
German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.\" GC&CS learned of the
possible introduction of the fourth wheel in May 1941 but did not get
Wynn-Williams to work until very late in the year. His work proceeded at
a very slow pace. Doc Keen was not put to work to think about a
highspeed Bombe for the four-wheel problem until late spring 1942.

63\. PE§i NSA CCH Series XII Z, Hut 6,4 October 1942, \"Electronics for
Bombe not Working.\"

64\. (U) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 225-7.

65\. (¥S\#SJ) Keen built several new versions of his original Bombes. The
new Mammoths and Jumbos handled the standard three-and four-wheel Enigma
problems, while the Giants, Ogres and Twinns were, like some American
variants, commutator-based machines for special Enigma variation
problems. fF6\#£D NSA AHA ACC 13657, \"G.C. &C.S. Naval

SIGINT. Vol. Ill, German Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.\"
Cr\^SU NSA AHA ACC 17738, \"E Operations of the GC&CS, list of
machines,\" 25 February 1945.

66\. TTS) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 227. (8) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Eachus to Wenger,
18-91942, \"British four wheel design not progressing.\" \"fSSQ NSA CCH
Series IV.7.20, A P. Mahon, \'The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945. CS§)
NSA CCH Series XIII Z, Hut 6,4 October 1942, \"Electronics for Bombe not
Working.\" t«8 NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS49, \"A Posteriori Remarks
on the Cryptanalytic Aspects of the Bulldozer,\" Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946.

67\. (TSt\^SJQ NSA Bombe File, \"It is desired to construct\...\" April
25,1942, and August 5,1942, Wenger to Ely. PHWSQ NSA CCH Series XII
Z,(Sl2008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on the German Naval Ciphers,\"
October 1944. \[sic\].

68\. (WySTj NSA CCH Series XII Z, (Si2008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of
Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944. \[sic\] 51, 53

69\. flES) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP20-GY-A, \"American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,\" 7July 1944- CFSJ NSA AHA 35529,
Friedman to Corderman, 29 March, 1944, \"Comparison of our \"003\" type
of \"Bombe\" with the rotary type.

70\. Cm NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946. fFSWSI) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT TS-10-E-5, \"Bombe Computations.\" CSSJ
NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A, \"American Cryptanalysis
of German Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944- (TStV&O NSA CCH P series Box CCO
67, RIP 607 shows that when \"G\" did finally incorporate a diagonal
board it looked for hotpoints; the British looked for coldpoints.

71\. fPSi NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946. ffS//SI) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT Ts-io-E-5, \"Bombe Computations.\"


TOP CECnETOCOMlMTJ/nEL TO UCA, AUG, OAN, ODn AND N2U/X1



72.TTS7VSi). Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5-, C1T Ts-io-E-5, \"Bombe Computations.\"

73\. rPW&e-Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT Ts-io-E-5, \"Bombe Computations.\" (T0//MJ
NSA CCH Series XII Z (S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on the German
Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944- \[sic\] 51-3- f«0 NSA CCH R Collection,
Box CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A \"American Cryptanalysis of German Naval
Systems,\" 7 July 1944.

74\. (U) NSA RAM File, \"Decision Regarding Future E Policy,\" app May
1942, and \"For GC&CS\" August 5,1942.

75\. (U) NSA RAM File, app. May, 1942, 0P-20-G to Station X, \"Latest
Thoughts on Electronic Developments.\"

76\. (U) Much of the information on GC&CS\'s actions and intention
remains in closed archives, and some informed historical guesses have to
be made. One of those is that GC&CS\'s failure to send requested
documentation was as much the result of the slow pace of its four-wheel
Bombe program and a desire to keep face as it was the result of a desire
to monopolize all the \"E\" work.

77\. CFS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946, 4.

78\. (SJ Britain sent more assurances to the United States in August, but
they were too late to stop \"G\" from going ahead with its Bombe
program, fij) NSA CCH Series XIII Z, Eachus toWenger, 2 August 1942,
\"Full Wiring Diagram on Way.\" (Si NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger
toOp-20-GM, 6 August 1942, \"Nature of E machine.\"

79- (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to GC&CS, July 7, 1942, \"Eachus &Ely,\"
and August 5,1942, \"Send Wiring Diagram.\" NARA RG457, SRH-306,
\"OP-20-G Exploits and Commendations in World War II,\" 23, \"Shark was
not all.\" Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1983), 236. F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second
World War, Volume II (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 55-57

80\. (TS//SQ. The Robinsons were independent creations but were much like
the Bush comparator

machines. However, they were built to handle the codes used on teletype
systems, and they were not strict embodiments of the IC method but of
Turing\'s new Delta method, which searched for statistical biases in the
distribution of binary values. However, Delta shared much with the IC
approach. (TS//&O (Laconic, Nocon) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F.
Stahly, \"Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" (T3//GI NSA CCH
Series XII Z, H. H, Campaigne, \"Reading TUNNY,\" NSA Technical Journal
(Fall 1962). TT3//M) NSA CCH Local Archive, \"Army-Navy Descriptive
Dictionary ofCryptologic Terms,\" Army Security Agency, February 1947.

81\. TTV/\^B\" Letters from Howard Campaigne to Brian Randell circa 1975.
Thomas H. Flowers, \"The Design of Colossus,\" Annals of the History of
Computings (July 1983), 224. I.J. Good, \"Early Work on Computers at
Bletchley,\" Cryptologia 3 (1979), 65-77- (TS77«t) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
H. H. Campaigne, \"Reading TUNNY,\" NSA Technical Journal (Fall 1962).

82\. (T9//SI). The Robinsons, also called \"bedsteads,\" became more and
more powerful and rapid. Some models used vacuum tubes, and by the
war\'s end, one of the Robinsons used four tapes.\'T\^NSA CCH Series XII
Z,GCHQ, \"Machine Solution of TUNNY Traffic (Robinson),\" 22 August
1943-TTS7V«\^ NSA CCH Local Archive, \"Army-Navy Descriptive Dictionary
ofCryptologic Terms,\" Army Security Agency, February 1947.

83\. (U) NSA CCH XIK, S. Snyder, Box, II, B. Randell, \"The Colossus,\"
June 1976. rTS7VSIl.NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Theory of Rectangles:
Photostat of British Paper describing breaking of the TUNNY Machine by
Means of Rectangles,\" 4 September 1944. ffS//SQ NSA CCH Series XII
Z,\"Fish Notes,\" December 1944- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Colossus, Instructions and procedures used in setting FISH messages on
the Colossus,\" 14 December 1944.

84\. (T577\<SJ) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Colossus, Instructions and
procedures used in setting FISH messages on the Colossus,\" 14 December
1944.

85\. (U) Thomas H. Flowers, \"The Design of Colossus,\" Annals of the
History of Computing 5 (July 1983): 240. Allen W.M. Coombs, \"The Making
of Colossus\" Annals of the History of Computing 5





(1983): 253-259. W.W. Chandler, \"The Installation and Maintenance of
Colossus,\" Annak of the History of Computing 5 (1983): 260, Andrew
Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York; Simon and Schuster, 1983),
268, Although their documentation is still classified, there were
additional electronic machines in GC&CS\'s arsenal by the end of the
war. Apparently, they went beyond Colossus.

86\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-349, \"Achievements of the SSA in World War
II,\" and SRH-361, \"History- of the Signal Security Agency.\"

87\. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to GC&CS, app. May, 1942, \'Future E
Policy,\' and Wenger to Ely, August 5,1942.

88\. (U) Ronald Lewin, The American Magic (New York: Farrar, Straus,
Giroux, 1982), 85. Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, etal., And I Was There:
Pearl Harbor and Midway: Breaking the Secrets (William Morrow & Co.,
Inc., 1985), 95. W, J. Holmes, DoubleEdged Secrets (Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 1979). One story is that Washington found different
additives from their JN-25 analyses and thought that Hawaii was far off
base regarding the recovered code groups.

89\. (U) NSA RAM File, August 5,1942, Wenger to Ely. NSA RAM File, Part
II of Report to J. N. Wenger, Capt. USN, \"Resume of the Dayton, Ohio
Activity During World War II.\" Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand, Trial Records, August 19, 1942, Desch to
Engineering Department, \"Special Switch,\" and September 18, 1942,
\"Change in Specifications.\"

90\. (U) NSA RAM File, Part II. of Report to J. N. Wenger, Capt. USN,
\"Resume of the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World War II.\"

91\. (U) A simple electronic American Bombe would have sixty-four fixed
double wheels calling for at least 7,000 tubes, probably twice that.
Amplifiers and control electronics would probably have called for
another 10,000 or so. A universal machine, in which all wheels could be
automatically set, would have needed close to 100,000 tubes.
Correspondence with Joseph Eachus. NSA RAM File, Wenger to GC&CS,
September 4,1942, \"Electronic Device.\"

92\. (U) F. H. Hinsley, Biitish Intelligence in the Second World War,
Volume III (New York:

Cambridge University Press, 1981), 56. For the independent research
agreement, interview with Joseph Eachus. The situation with the American
army may have been even more critical. It was a pure consumer of Ultra
and much other intelligence during the North African invasion and as
late as February 1943, it was dependent on GC&CS for German signal
intelligence. NARA RG457, SRH-364, \"History of the Signal Security
Agency, Volume One Parts 1 and 2,19391945- A Declaration of
Independence.\"

93-\"TS)sNSA CCH Series XII Z, Eachus to Wenger, 18-9-1942, \"British
four-wheel design not progressing.\"

94\. e\^ NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946, 4-\*t\*S\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September
231942, \"Your Bombe plan approved.\"

95\. (U) NSA RAM File, September 3,1942, Wenger toOP-20, \"Cryptanalysis
of the German (Enigma) Machine.\" F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in
the Second World War, Volume II (New York-, Cambridge University Press,
1981), 57- Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand, Trial Records, September 18, 1942, Desch to Engineering
Department. Compare the Americans\' promised production rate with
Keen\'s output. Martin Campbell-Kelly, IC L:A Business and Technical
History, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 118-119. If the United States
had built the 350 machines rather than the 100 in the first batch, the
cost would have been a staggering \$16,000,000 based on the \$45,000 per
machine for the production run.

96.\^1 NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to OP-20-G, \"Memo of present
plans for an electromechanical analytical machine,\" 15 September 1942.

97\. \^ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Report of Dr. Turing, \"Visit to National
Cash Register Corporation of Dayton, Ohio,\" circa Dec. 1942.

98\. dm NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon, \'The History of Hut Eight,
1939-1945,\" 6& states that the later versions of the British high-speed
Bombe had fast wheels which moved at 10,000 revolutions per minute. But
this figure may be a typographical error. Most other sources give a much
lower rpm for the British four-wheel Bombe. See (Y&) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, Hut 6, \"Electronics for Bombe not Working,\"


TOP SErRFTWCOMHilTOREl TO USA, AUfi, CAM, OBR AHP HZLM1


which in late 1942 gives a projected speed of 2,000 rpm. Also see ffSJ
NSA CCH Series XII Z,Joan Murray, \"A Personal Contribution to the Bombe
Story,\" NSA Technical Journal, 20 (Fall 1974): 41

99\. CS) NSA CCH, Series XII Z.Joseph Desch to OP-20-G, \"Memo of present
plans for an electromechanical analytical machine,\" 15 September 1942.

100\. CSi. NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to OP-20-G, \"Memo of
present plans for an electromechanical analytical machine,\" 15
September 1942,

9

101\. fS) A full diagonal board would be a 26 x 26 matrix, which would
need 676 primary tubes and a score of complementary electronic
components. CS} NSA CCH, Series XIIZ, Joseph Desch to OP-20-G, \"Memo of
present plans for an electromechanical analytical machine,\" 15
September 1942, 9.

102\. CS) NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to OP-20-G, \"Memo of
present plans for an electromechanical analytical machine,\" 15
September 1942,1.

103\. f¥S//&t) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5, CIT Ts10-E-5, \"Bombe Computations.\"

104\. (ffi/ZSt) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The
\"Yellow Machine,\" 5052. (T5//3I) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5, CI\'F Ts-io-E-5, \"Bombe
Computations.\" (TS//S1) NSA AHA 16331, \"6812th Signal Security
Detachment (PROV) Apo 413 Army,\" 15 June 1945.

105\. GFS-) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September 23, 1942,
\"Your Bombe plan approved,\" \$} NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch
toOP-20-G, \"Memo of present plans for an electromechanical analytical
machine,\" September 15, 1942, 2.

106\. (TS//SI) The men at \"G\" were not able to intercept and interpret
strong menus for quite some time, they sent very weak menus to the
Bombes throughout much of 1942 and 1943, They realized they were
dependent upon the British for the types of menus that made the Bombes
useful by having very few \"stories\" produced per run. (fSi NSA AHA ACC
35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February 1946. ffSZ/SH NSA
CCH Series XIIZ, GCCS, \"OP-20G Contribution.\" (TW&Q Navy Dept., Office
of Chief

of Naval Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT TS-10-E-5,
\"Bombe Computations.\" TS\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report
\#2: The Yellow Machine,\" 50-52.

107\. fFS} NSA CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September 23, 1942,
\"Your Bombe plan approved.\" fS)i NSA CCH, Series XII Z.Joseph Desch
toOP-20-G, \"Memo of present plans for an electromechanical analytical
machine,\" September 15, 1942, 2.

108\. tS) NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Memorandum for OP-20-G, \"Collaboration
ofU. S.and British Radio Intelligence Organizations on Japanese and
German Projects,\" J. N. Wenger, October 1,1942.

109.1S).NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Memorandum forOP-20-G, \"Collaboration
ofU. S.and British Radio Intelligence Organizations on Japanese and
German Projects,\" J. N. Wenger, October 1,1942.

110\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand , Trial Records, September 18, 1942, Desch to Engineering
Department. F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World War,
Volume II (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 56. NARA RG457,
SRH 361, \"History of the Signal Security Agency,\" 274. NSA RAM File:
OP-20-G to GC&CS July 7,1942; OP-20-G toOP-20 September 3,1942; J.N.
Wenger toOP-20GM, August 6,1942; Wenger to Ely, August 5,1942; and
\"Engstrom toMeader re Turing visit,\" January 1, 1943

111\. CSJ NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Memorandum for OP-20-G, \"Collaboration
ofU. S.and British Radio Intelligence Organizations on Japanese and
German Projects,\" J. N. Wenger, October 1,1942.

112\. (U) Of course, the Americans did not suspect that Britain had its
own Russian informant who was telling all to Stalin. Christopher Andrew
and Oleg Gordievsky, KGB: The Inside Story of Its Foreign Operations
from Lenin to Gorbachev (New York: Harper Collins, 1990), 304.

113\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-306, \"0P-20-G Exploits and Commendations in
World War H,\" 19. F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second
World War, Volume II (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 57.
Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1983), 243.





tS\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger to OP-20, October 1,1942,
\"Collaboration ofU. S.and British radio Intelligence organizations on
Japanese and German projects.\"

114\. (U) Very useful on the question of the U.S. Army\'s Ultra struggle
is \"Origins, Functions & Problems of the Special Branch, M.I. S.,\" in
John Mendelshon (ed.), Covert Warfare: Intelligence, Counterintelligence
and Military Deception During the World War II Era (Garland, 1989).

115-TTS\^NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon, The History of Hut Eight,
1939-1945,\" 90.

116\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008) Navy- Dept., Office of
Chief of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack
on the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944 \[sic\], cites October 1942
as the date of arrival of the first M8, but other sources claim it
arrived in spring 1943. On the M9, interview with Philip J. Bochicchio,
14 September 1994

117\. (J9ffS\$ NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (0P-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944. \[sic\] (TStYSI) NSA CCH \"P\"
Series, Box CCo67, CITS, \"E\" Series, Vol. E-7.

118\. ff//Si). Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing; The Enigma (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1983), 236. NSA RAM File, January 5,1943, \"Report on
Turing Visit to Dayton.\" (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Dr. Turing ofG.C.
&C.S., \"Visit to National Cash Register Corporation,\" December, 1942.
(TS//Slr)- NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G \"Memoranda on Bombe and the
relationship of the U. S. and U. K.,\" circa 1943.

119\. tS) Turing remarked about Desch\'s apparent decision not to use
some features already planned for the new British four-wheel Bombe. {S}-
NSA CCH Series XII Z, Report of Dr. Turing, \"Visit to National Cash
Register Corporation of Dayton, Ohio,\" circa Dec. 1942.

120\. (SJ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Eachus to Wenger, 18 September 1942,
\"British four wheel design not progressing.\'\" CSi NSA CCH Series XIU
Z, Report of Dr. Turing, \"Visit to National Cash Register Corporation
of Dayton, Ohio,\" circa Dec. 1942.

121\. (¥SJ. On British comments besides those of Turing, NSA CCH, shinn
box, \"Desch.\"

122\. (¥§}. NSA CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September 23, 1942,
\"Your Bombe plan approved.\"

123\. r8i NSA RAM File,, January 5,1943, \"Report on Turing visit to
Dayton\"; January 20, Engstrom to Meader, \"Change Bombe Design\"; and
March 17,1943 Prototypes constructed.. fSJ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Report
of Dr. Turing, \'Visit to National Cash Register Corporation of Dayton,
Ohio,\" circa. December 1942. (£) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Dr. Turing
ofG.C.& C.S. \"Visit to National Cash Register Corporation,\" December
1942.

124\. tSi On the gearing, interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 6-14-94.

125\. (SiNSA CCH Series XII Z, Dr. Turing of G.C. & C. S., \"Visit to
National Cash Register Corporation,\" December 1942.

126\. CTO//0\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z.OP-20-G \"Memoranda on Bombe and the
relationship of the U.S. and U.K.,\" circa 1943.

127\. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 6-1494.

128\. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio 6-14

94

129\. (\*FS). Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 614-94. NSA, CCH
Series XII Z,CNO, CITP 88, \"Technical and Theoretical Report of N-530
BOMBE, Navy Dept., Washington, D.C., September, 1946.

130\. rT\^SQ-NSA RAM File, December 11,1942, Horn to Robinson,
\"Procurement of Materials for 7892,\" and December 28, 1942, CNO to
Deeds, \"Help needed on special project at NCR.\" (T9ff&i± NSA CCH
Series XII Z, OP-20-G \"Memoranda on Bombe and the relationship of the
U. S. and U. K.,\" circa 1943.

131\. (U) NSA RAM File, January 5,1943, Wenger to Meader, \"Turing
Visit,\"Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing; The Enigma (New York: Simon and
Schuster,

1983), 236

132\. T\^S) NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16
February 1946.

133\. (U) NSA NCML Message File, for example, June 4,1943, \"Use most
Adam-Eve time for real tests.\"

134\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message file, May 24, 1943, \"DC has sent test
problems for prototypes,\" and




May 29,1943, \"Adam Eve have serious technical problems.\" The first
British four-wheel Bombe was completed in June 1943. F. H. Hinsley,
British Intelligence in the Second World War, Volume II (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 748.

135\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, May 29, \\ 1943, \"Shorts and
opens,\" and May 31,1943, \"Can use

part of machine only.\"

136\. tra//S9 NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, May 20, 1943,\'Redman Visit,\"
and May 29, 1943 \"Adam and Eve problems.\" F. H. Hinsley, British
Intelligence in the Second World War, Volume II (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1981), 748. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 267. W. W. Chandler, \"The
Installation and Maintenance of Colossus,\" Annals of the History of
Computing 5 (1983): 261. ffSJ On the date of England\'s first fourwheel
Bombe, ff9//S\*NSA CCH Series XII Z, GCCS, OP-20-G Contribution.

137\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, June 14,1943, \"Cain and Abel.\"

138\. (U) The first \"formal\" production model was turned over to the
navy at Dayton for testing on July 4, 1943, and its first test run was
on July 23, 1943. Cain and Abel were off the line in the first week of
July but were not ready for final testing until the last week of the
month. Another complication was the delayed completion of the new
building in Washington. Desch did make some minor changes after
Engstrom\'s request. NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 6, 1943, July
26,1943, and July 23, 1943, \"Status of Bombes.\"

139\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 26, 1943, Dayton to Washington
\'Bombes may not work.\'

140\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 29, 1943, Desch to Engstrom,
July 29, 1943, \"Fast wheel running too hot, bombe may not work.\"

141\. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 6-1484

142\. (TS) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-49, \"A Posteriori Remarks on
the Cryptanalytic Aspects of the Bulldozer,\" Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946.

143\. (TS.) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Hut 6,4 October 1942, \'Electronics for
Bombe not Working.\' fSSJNSA

CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September 23, 1942, \"Your Bombe
plan approved.\"

144\. (IS). NSA CCH Series XII Z, Joan Murray, \"A Personal Contribution
to the Bombe Story,\" NSA Technical Journal, 20 (Fall 1974): 41

145.4S)-NSA CCH Series XII Z, Joseph Desch, \"Plan for the American
Bombe,\" September 15, 1942. (TO//OI) NSA CCH Series XII Z (S-2568)
\"Tentative Brief Descriptions of Cryptanalytic Equipment for Enigma
Problems,\" Circa 1945.

146\. TT3//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z (S-2568) \"Tentative Brief
Descriptions of Cryptanalytic\' Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" Circa
1945.

147\. (TO//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944. \[sic\] tS) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow Machine,\" 50-52.

148\. (TO//OI) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT Ts-io-E-5, \"Bombe Computations,\" 5-14.
fS)- NSA, CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2: The Yellow
Machine,\" 12, 16. (TQ//OI) NSA AHA 16331, \"6812th Signal Security
Detachment (PROV ) Apo 413 Army,\" 15 June 1945- l\"S\*l NSA, CCH Series
IIZ, CNO, C1TP 88, \"Technical and Theoretical Report of N-530 BOMBE,\"
Navy Dept., Washington, D.C., September 1946.

149- (Si NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Cryptanalytic Report \#2 The Yellow
Machine,\" 3,54.

150\. ffS) NSA CCH Series.V.7.20, A. P. Mahon, \"The History of Hut
Eight, 1939-1945.\"

151\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, November 12,1943, \"85 Bombes in
D.C.\"

152\. (U) The first Bombe contract was terminated on December 1,1943, but
some of the first models continued to trickle into Washington as late as
Summer 1944. NSA RAM File, History of OP-20-G /NCML/4e, June, 1944,
\"n530 bombes.\"

153- (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, November 29,1943, \'Bombe shipment
from Dayton.\'

154- (U) H. F. Hinsley, et al., British Intelligence in the Second World
War .Volume II (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 57-8 and
752.

top oconcT//ooMiNT//ra:L to uca, auc, cam, gbr amd nau/xi



Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1983), 262.

155\. (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z,(Si2008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, \"The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,\" October 1944, \[sic\] 23.

156\. (T9} NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon, The History of Hut Eight,
1939-1945.\"

157\. (U) H. F. Hinsley, et al., British Intelligence in the Second World
War, Volume II (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 752. NARA
RG457, SRH-141, Papers from the Personal Files of Alfred McCormick, Part
2,\" March 4,1944, \"Memorandum for General Bissel, Army-Navy Agreement
Regarding Ultra\" Thomas Parrish, Tlie Ultra Americans: The United
States\' Role in Breaking the Nazi Code (New York: Stein & Day, 1987),
79NSA RAM File, February 21,1944, W. A, Wright to OP20-G,\"Comparison of
Army and Navy Enigma Equipment.\"

i58.-f¥SH\<SA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP20-GY-A, \"American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,\" 7 July 1944- (Tfl//CI) NSA AHA
ACC 13657, \"G.C. &C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.\"

159\. (Wf NSA AHA ACC 35701 \"History of the Bombe Project,\" 16 February
1946, 9-TS\^NSA CCH Series XII Z, 21-2-1944, OF-20-G to British
Admiralty Delegation, \"U.S. Will Increase Efforts.\" (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Alexander toLt. Church, 24 March 1944, \"British will
emphasize building three-wheel bombes.\"

160\. \<TS//S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953, and various years. (TS//BI) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953,

161\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 20, 1943, \"New procedure,
grenade,\" and August 14,1943, \"Progress on grenade.\" The grenades
were also used on the four-wheel problems when it was thought that one
of the wheel settings was known.

162\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953, and various years. FTO//03 NSA CCH
Series XII Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

163\. ffS77«\^-NSA CCH Series XII Z(S-2568) \"Tentative Brief
Descriptions of Cryptanalytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" circa
1945.

164\. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 20, 1943, \"New procedure,
grenade,\" and August 14, 1943, \"Progress on grenade.\" (€) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Descriptions of NSA Early SPDs and Computers, as compiled
from various NSA sources.

165\. flfl//S3 NSA CCH \"P\" Series, Box CC006, CNO CITS TA-10-E-1,
Volume i,The Click Process, January 1946. She pointed to the use of the
message indicators as the \"crib,\" but other cribs could be used by the
Grenades.

i66.t€i.NSA CCH Series XII Z, Descriptions of NSA Early SPDs and
Computers, as compiled from various NSA sources.

i67\--(TS//S» NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953, and various years. (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XIT Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

i68r(T0//ai)-NSA CCH Series XII Z,\'Le.Roy H. Wheadey, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953 and various years. {TS7ySJQ.NSA CCH Series
XII Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

169\. {€)-NSA CCN Series XII Z, Descriptions of NSA Early SPDs and
Computers, as compiled from various NSA sources.

l70.-(TD//ei) MSA CC\* Series Xll Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,\" 30 May 1953 and various years.\"TT3//6l).NSA CCH
Series XII Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

171\. -&& (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of
General Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March 1945.

172\. £¥« (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Tentative Brief Description of
General Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,\" 26 March 1945- \"A
Time of Triumph.\"

173\. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval Communications, \"Brief
Descriptions of RAM Equipment,\" Washington, D.C., October 1947. NSA RAM
File, Report of R I. Meader, Captain USNR to J. H.Wenger, Captain, USN,
\"14 Days Training Duty, Report of,\" January 21,1949.





174\. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, U, S, Naval Communications, CITP TP-33
\"Overhaul of Hypo \#1,\" Washington, D.C., June 1945








