Chapter 10 (U) A Matter of Faith

\(U) Would Science or an Old Tactician Save the Agency?

(TS//SI) The Nomad debacle occurred as NSA was under siege. The Raytheon
effort proved an embarrassing failure just as a round of threatening
inquiries into NSA and the American intelligence community began.1 NSA
was under intense pressure because the Agency was letting America down.
There were more than questions being raised about the Agency\'s Soviet
effort.

(3S\#8i-) Almost as threatening toNSA\'s future as the continued Soviet
high-level blackout was what its critics thought was its inability to
develop and employ science and high technology. The Cold War was a
high-tech war, but NSA seemed incapable of achieving what Hooper had
demanded in the 1930s, the integration of advanced science and
technology into SIG1NT.2

\(U) NSA was almost confined to a very minor role in American
intelligence. It came even closer to losing much of its independence.
But it found a savior, the determined and politically savvy Ralph ,1.
Canine, the new Agency\'s first director.3 A regular army man in his
mid-sos, Canine had an energetic and straightforward management style,
but also a willingness to trust the judgments of his subordinates. Very
important, he was an astute bureaucratic infighter; he blended the
determination of a George Patton with the ability to relate to others.
He knew how to deal with his superiors as well as his staff.

(•¥8\^- As a result, in mid-1953, when the National Security Council
began investigating the nation\'s strategic vulnerabilities, Canine was
able to fend off its attempt to interfere in NSA\'s most secret internal
affairs. To protect the Agency and its secrets, Canine formed his own
review com

mittee and filled it with NSA\'s good friends from the new version of
SCAG, the NSA Scientific Advisory Board (SAB). Chaired by Dr. H.P.
Robertson of the California Institute of Technology, the committee\'s
findings were quite positive and, not surprisingly, fit with the plans
and orientations of NSA\'s staff. Because of Robertson, NSA kept its
independence and another chance at being a high technology innovator.

(3¥r) Wisely, Robertson\'s report did not dwell on the high-level
cryptanalytic failures; rather, it saluted NSA\'s plain language-T/A
efforts. Robertson called for more of them and for the resources needed
to extend its reach into voice intercept. But the recognition of the
importance of the noncryptanalytic functions was not accompanied by
cryptanalytic defeatism.

££&)■ Robertson saved the core of the Agency. He trusted NSA\'s
\"cryppies\" and asked they be given what was needed for an all-out
attack on the Soviet ciphers, especially the important Soviet
\[systems.4

CESt As Canine had planned, the report fit his policies, some of which
were already being turned into hardware.

\(U) Rushing \"Bifs,f Not Even \"Bytes,\" into the Agency

■gny/OB While Raytheon had been battling with the Nomad data processor,
NSA\'s engineers were designing a series of much less ambitious but very
important machines for the Agency\'s escalating data problem. They had
to automate data collection. If the Agency was to provide intelligence
based on low-level data, it had to modernize its collection systems.

3.3(h)(2)




P.L 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)

(T3//SI) After outlining their ideas, the engineers turned to several
contractors. By the end of the 1950s, NSA\'s \"basement\" had almost two
dozen special-purpose computers to convert complex analog signals to
digital form, to reformat digital data for computer processing, to edit
incoming messages, and even to scan the messages for \"keywords.\"The
new keyword programs eliminated messages of little interest, saving
thousands of hours of analyst time.

(TS//SI) Audico, Buddy, Swallow, Neely, Tampa, Colt, Daytona and many
other innovative special computers speeded the processing of all types
of incoming data.5 Of special importance were the Orlando and Bogart
computers.

CBS\#9e The cost of the half dozen very specialized Orlandos was more
than \$2,500,000, but the role they played in converting Soviet \| \|

I \[messages was invaluable. And their builder, the SIS\'s good friend
Technitrol, of Philadelphia, made them to last. They ran constantly for
eight years.6 The Bogarts from ERA (Remington-Rand) served as long.

\(8) Although the Bogarts were planned as straightforward machines to
prepare data for Nomad, as it became evident that Raytheon\'s project
was failing, their design shifted. The final Bogarts came close to being
universal computers.7 They were asked to fill in while the Agency
searched for a true data machine.

69\) It took ERA more than three years to complete the first Bogart model
in 1957. By the time the other four Bogarts were delivered,
Remington-Rand had received almost \$2,500,000 from the Agency, much
more than originally intended. The money was well spent,

::: {style="width: 77.22461779694237%;"}
:::

(U//FOUO) Bogart





however. Despite some \"bugs\" that delayed completion of the first
model, the Bogarts were nigged and ubiquitous, partly because they used
a valuable innovation. Their technology centered on what many thought
would become the best alternative to vacuum tubes for the \"logic\" of a
computer: magnetic cores similar to those appearing in the memories of
advanced machines of the mid-1950s.8

(S\^-That version of \"solid-state\" technology made the Bogarts very
dependable. In addition, it allowed a powerful architecture, which led
the Bogarts to play many different roles within the Agency. They even
became a stopgap replacement for Nomad.

4S-) After it was accepted that Nomad was a failure, aBogart was
connected to a battery of tape drives. Using the IBM tape system that
was evolving into the Agency\'s standard, that Bogart served as a useful
cryptanalytic and data processing machine.

(3S//0\"ij That and the other Bogarts became Agency favorites. They were
called on for editing and scanning for keywords and even for testing for
plain text through calculating the percentage of spaces in a message.
They helped those who began designing circuits with computer programs;
and the Bogarts were used for advanced statistical cryptanalysis.9 The
analysts who were researching the higher level Soviet systems asked for
most of the Bogart capacity, butl

erated messages received their share of machine

time.10

gES//0I) The Bogarts did much more. With innovative additions, such as
Meccano and TuneSeek, which sampled analog (audio) inputs and converted
them to various digital forms, the Bogarts became essential to the
Agency\'s more advanced data collection systems.

Qj& One of the Bogarts became critical to an attempt to meet the demands
of those frustrated

by centralized computer systems. Cryptanalysts wanted computers closer
to their work and to have control over their \"runs.\" To answer that
need, a Bogart served as the central computer for a remote job entry
system at the Agency, Rob Roy. Rob Roy gave a hint of the future of
computers within the Agency because it was a precursor of
\"distributed\" processing.\"

\(V) Canine Guards the Fort

(TfJ//0I) The Bogarts were an unqualified success, but they were not the
kind of large-scale techno-victory that could prove NSA was worthy
enough to guide its own future. When the Bogarts were still a sketch,
Ralph Canine had to deal with another round of investigations and
lobbying by outsiders. They were aimed at reducing the powers of NSA and
exerting control over its operations. There was a real threat that if
NSA did not show some astounding progress against the Communist targets,
outsiders, such as DoD bureaucrats, would be given power over American
cryptanalysis. Many critics wanted cryptanalysis turned over to
academics.

69\") Since the 1940s, when requests for a large number of supergrade
personnel NSA needed to build a \"science\" cadre were refused, there
were suggestions that a high-level and independent cryptanalytic think
tank be established, one that could skirt the budget restrictions placed
on the Agency. The \"tank\'s\" experts would deal with difficult
problems without being distracted by dayto-day operational crises. Being
outside of government had other advantages, it was claimed In a
sometimes-condescending way, it was asserted that an independent
institution would be attractive to the \"best\" men because it could
offer amenities barred to a federal agency. There would be competitive
salaries and a \"campus\" atmosphere and routine; time cards and
regulated hours would not be required.12

(TS//SI) As NSA\'s Scientific Advisory Board\'s membership became more
academic, the sugges

P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)





tions to establish such a center increased, and they were accompanied by
recommendations for an NSA program to support basic science/technology
research.13 Board members such as John von Neumann wanted the Agency to
sponsor the development of an electronic circuit for computers that
would be 1,000 times faster than current ones. Even nonacademics, such
as Howard Engstrom, at times joined the chorus of voices that thought
the best way to integrate science and cryptanalysis was to establish an
independent \"campus\" research organization.u

Q¥S\$ Few within the Agency liked such ideas, however. They were taken
as insults.15 And they appeared to threaten the security of the Agency.

£ES} Ralph Canine led those who wanted to protect NSA from being torn
apart. To do so, he had to fight many battles simultaneously. The
military SIGINT groups wanted their freedom; the DoD desired to force
\"science\" and scientific management on the Agency; \"impractical\"
scientists demanded to take control of research; Congress wanted
research and development to be

::: {style="width: 37.08349666797334%;"}
:::

contracted out to the corporations; and the CIA sought to establish its
own cryptanalytic organizations.16

(T0//0I) Canine was good at his job, but he could not overcome all the
threats and challenges. He would have to give some ground to maintain
the Agency\'s integrity.

(T0//QI) He did his best to build a viable research and development
branch within the Agency. He finally secured a few supergrade slots and
lobbied for an expanded engineering research group, one with enough men
to build their own special computers and to adequately supervise
contractors.17 He tried to hire more mathematicians, in hopes that he
could stave off the demands for that independent think tank. He sought a
research director who could play the same political role. And he used
all his political skills to delay being forced to create a new high
administrative position, one for a \"civilian\" deputy director. He knew
that would lead to DoD\'s interference within the Agency. The DoD wanted
the power to appoint the deputy, and it was clear that he would be an
\"outsider.\"

0PS//SI) By the midyear of his tenure as NSA\'s director, Canine had
done a great deal to protect the Agency and further its achievements.
But he had not made up for the failure to penetrate the new Soviet
systems; he had not been able to gain the resources needed to free the
Agency from its dependence on contractors; and he had not solved the
\"science\" problem. The Agency remained in trouble. Budgets were being
questioned.

(TS//SI) Fortunately, Canine got some unanticipated help: the Hoover
Commission of 1954. As a part of the mandate President Eisenhower had
given to ex-president Herbert Hoover to review all of the executive
branch, a subcommittee led by Mark Clark looked at, if not inside,

\(U) Ralph Canine


TOP OCCRCT/ZGOMINT/mCL UQA, AUG, OAN ODR AND NZU/X1


mHbfcLHbl»mHlllllll»W ■\* inn M..nnn\|WHM

NSA To Canine\'s relief, its many recommendations were almost all in
favor of NSA.18

4-¥&) When Clark\'s recommendations were echoed by those of a special
Executive Office science board under James R. Killian (which had many
contacts with NSA\'s Science Advisory group), Canine knew that if he had
attractive programs the president would underwrite a massive
\"techno-fix\" within the agency.19

££&) The only danger that Canine saw in the Clark-Killian
recommendations was the reappearance of the idea that a captive but
independent corporation be established to handle highlevel cryptanalytic
research.20 But that threat was outweighed by the faith in NSA shown by
the boards. In 1955 the news spread throughout the Agency that ideas
that had been considered pipe dreams might be turned into projects.

(\^ftr) Several computer-related initiatives that had been discussed
within the Agency and SAB were brought to Canine. By 1956 they were
being formed into two historic projects that, it was hoped, would have a
major impact on the computer industry\'s treatment ofthe Agency and
reverse NSA\'s cryptanalytic fortunes.

GES//SF) One project was an attempt to define and build the perfect
cryptanalytic computer. The other was a strange mixture of almost blind
faith in practical cryptanalysis and in high science and technology.

(TO//8I) Neither project went as expected, however. Although the
Eisenhower administration granted NSA unprecedented amounts for the
Harvest and Freehand Projects in 1962, a generation after Hooper had
called for the integration of science and high technology into SIGINT,
NSA remained unable to re-create an Ultra. It remained somewhat of a
second-class citizen in the eyes ofthe computer industry.

\(U) Enter Tom Watson and IBM

\(U) Before the two great projects were more than speculations, it
appeared that the Agency could rely upon the computer companies for much
of what it needed, especially for data processing computers. Two major
firms had emerged that were stable and willing to finance technological
developments on their own. RemingtonRand (which included the old ERA)
and IBM were upgrading their lines of computers and planning new
advances. IBM, concentrating on data processing equipment, was finally
catching up to Remington\'s sales.

(& Because of its long history of interaction with the SIGINT agencies,
including the ongoing Sled and other RAM work, and with so many of its
computer engineers having been part ofthe cryptanalytic efforts of World
War II, IBM had a special view of NSA It saw the Agency as in need of
its help, IBM also saw NSA as an agency that could help IBM.

\(U) IBM needed help. For IBM\'s computer advocates, who found it
difficult to convince Tom Watson that electronics would become a sound
business venture, contracts with government agencies were vital. They
would provide needed research funds. Two old government friends of
IBM\'s tabulators, NSA and AEG, seemed likely candidates to subsidize
development.

\(U) IBM engineers needed good friends. Tom Watson had taken a
wait-and-see attitude towards electronic computers. After a rather
costly and somewhat embarrassing venture, the creation ofthe SSEC
computer, he resisted major computer investments. He financed several
small research projects and supported the development and production of
electronic add-ons for the tabs. But even emerging competition did not
change his attitude. He was aware ofthe UNTVAC and of the work at ERA,
but it was not until the increased pressures from his own engineers and
the outbreak ofthe Korean War that he gave per

TOP SEeHETOCOMINTHRCL USA, AU3, CAM QDR AMD NZUfXI



top (TranEiwcinnmnwi haa, auq, can qdr and nzu/xi

mission to build a full-fledged electronic computer.21 That permission
came with some important qualifications, however.

\(U) The firm\'s computer enthusiasts had to guarantee that IBM would not
lose appreciable amounts on any computer development. Watson let it be
known that enough customers had to have made promises to purchase any
proposed computer before it went to the manufacturing stage. Someone
besides IBM, he hoped, would underwrite development and initial
production costs.

\(U) An IBM research group associated with Columbia University was the
first to take up the challenge. In late 1950 IBM agreed to a cost-plus,
\$1.00 fixed-fee arrangement for a one-of-a-kind special computer for
Naval Ordnance. The NORC project launched IBM into computer development,
but it did not satisfy many of the engineers who had been lobbying for a
commercial product.

\(U) Among them were many old friends of NSA The head of IBM\'s
electronics laboratory, Ralph Palmer (ex-OP-20-G), was constantly
badgering the IBM hierarchy for more resources.22 Having spent several
years attempting to develop his Tape Processing Computer (TPM) and then
becoming the overseer of the corporation\'s Poughkeepsie laboratory, he
thought 1950 was a make-or-break year for the corporation\'s entry into
the commercial computer market.

to buying more machines from ERA and Technitrol.

\(U) The news about those purchases was worrisome, but it gave the IBM
engineers some needed ammunition. When they returned home, they had good
arguments for launching into a second IBM computer program. They pointed
out that many government agencies had indicated they would buy a
computer from the company. Of course, they emphasized the competitive
angle. If IBM did not offer a machine quickly, it faced countless
repetitions of what was happening at NSA.

&D Computers were displacing tabs, and new companies were displacing
IBM. NSA, the engineers reported, would soon have six of the largest and
most advanced computers in the world, and none of them would be IBM\'s.
They underscored another point: they could design a computer that would
fit the needs of many types of users besides those already contacted IBM
could have a widely marketable machine. Thirty or more of them could be
sold as soon as they were produced and additional orders were sure to
arrive.

\(U) After a push by young Tom Watson Jr. and a reassurance that patents
would remain with the company, the engineers got a go-ahead from Tom
senior to begin the Defense Calculator project. The engineers quickly
decided on the nature of the computer that was later named the IBM 701.

\(U) His insistence, combined with Tom Watson\'s desire to show a
contribution to the Korean War effort, led to high-level IBM managers
being allowed to make the rounds of government and military agencies
asking what type of machine was desired and what the agencies might be
willing to pay. Of course, they visited NSA (AFSA at the time), where
they learned of the need for a data processor. They also learned that
NSA expected Atlas and Abner to be completed soon and that the Agency
looked forward

\(U) Their decision was one that showed that financial imperative,
especially the need to develop a marketable, universal computer, had to
outweigh sensitivity toNSA\'s special computing

needs.

\(U) After examining the requirements of the potential customers and
balancing them against IBM\'s need to get an electronic machine on the
market, it became clear that NSA would have to be treated as a
stepsister. The new 701 computer


I UP bbCKbKJUUIVIINI/IKhL UbA, AUS, UAN UBN AND NZUJX1



was to be a von Neumann-like number cruncher, a machine to satisfy
missile developers, meteorologists, and ordnance agencies. The design
made sense because the mathematically oriented agencies were the vast
majority of expected customers. IBM decided to make some modifications
to the design of the well-known TAS machine, however. They included
magnetic tapes and enhanced I/O processing, but internal calculations
remained the machine\'s forte. The 701 relied upon CRT-like fast memory
and a slower magnetic drum.23

\(U) IBM turned away from a design that was suited to NSA. The option to
use the machine that Ralph Palmer had been working on, the TPM, was
dropped because it was an \"accounting\'\' computer. Palmer, favoring a
design that would allow a smooth transition from tabulator processing,
focused on developing a machine that handled much input and output, but
relatively little internal processing. Significantly, it was based on
variable length internal \"words,\" a feature essential to day-to-day
cryptanalytic methods. It also used a Binary-Coded Decimal (BCD)
representation of numbers which reduced the effort needed to translate
characters.24 All in all, his TPM was better for codebreaking work than
the 701.25

\(U) Unfortunately for NSA, there were problems with some of the TPM\'s
essential elements, such as its tape drives. As a result, the TPM was
kept in the laboratory as the 701 was rushed into production.

\(U) With the 701\'s design specifications in hand, the IBM
representatives returned to the government agencies seeking contracts.
Unfortunately, they had to carry with them the news that the rental for
the 701 might be twice as what had been mentioned during the earlier
visits. The price increase was one of the reasons why NSA\'s computer
group hesitated when IBM returned to Washington in mid-1952. The 701 was
almost rejected, but it was given a second chance after a study group
was formed. Joe

Eachus led the evaluation, and William Friedman composed the summary
reports.

ffiS) IBM had some admirers who recommended that the Agency acquire two
701s. But the review panel\'s report, though positive, was cautious. The
number-crunching nature of the machine was noted; there were complaints
about the 701 being almost twice as expensive as an Atlas; and there
were worries that IBM could not keep to its promised delivery schedule.
The delivery issue was serious. Some at the Agency wanted a very severe
financial penalty clause put in the contract; others demanded
cancellation ofthe contract if the first machine was not in Washington
by early spring 1953.

GKS} The group reached a consensus and recommended that two 701s with
extra tape drives and memory be ordered. If the first was not delivered
on time, both would be cancelled It was expected that the two machines
would cost the Agency \$36,000 a month in rent. \*\* The first machine
arrived close to its promised date, but it was more expensive than
thought. With operating charges included, it cost the agency \$531,000 a
year.27 Disappointing to IBM\'s friends within the Agency, the 701 did
not run as well as expected.

(&) Despite the 701\'s tantrums, it was put to productive use. The
Agency reprogrammed many Atlas and Abner jobs for the 701 and even made
it a replacement for Copperhead. But there were constant problems with
the tapes and their drives; much time was wasted because cards had to be
used as the 701\'s input. The 701 was replaced as soon as IBM completed
its more reliable 704 in 1956.

\$} IBM\'s computer reputation within the Agency was saved by the
arrival ofthe commercial version of Palmer\'s TPM, now called the 702.
It arrived in early 1955, just after Nomad was canceled. In many ways,
the 702 \"saved the day.\" As would the Bogarts, it filled in part ofthe
gap left




IUF bblKbmuUMiNU/HfcL UbA, AUb, LAN L.BK ANU NZUIA1

by the demise of Nomad. The 702 was abetter high-volume data machine
than the 701.

(\*) Excited by the 702\'s data processing potential, the production
group at the Agency began writing programs to replace the punchcard
procedures for large volume jobs. The 702 did not include the hoped-for
ability to perform I/O and other tasks concurrently, but its vastly
improved tapes immediately showed their stuff.

(&) When the 702\'s 1956 upgrade, the 705, was announced, IBM\'s
fortunes at the Agency were secure. Five 705s were ordered. The 705s
became standbys in the Agency and benchmarks for its production
processing.

\(8) IBM\'s role in the life of the Agency increased. By 1957 IBM had
manufactured about half ofNSA\'s general-purpose computers. By 1961 the
company had a lock on general-purpose computing. If the Bogarts, which
were originally envisioned as special-purpose machines, and the
experimental Alwac and LPG small computers are excluded, the only
non-IBM general-purpose machine in the Agency in the early 1960s was an
old Atlas II. And IBM remained as the vendor for the Agency\'s
electromechanical machines.28

\(U) A Machine for Us, Perhaps

©T Although IBM began to offer machines such as the 702 and 705 to do
much of what Nomad had been intended for, NSA\'s cryptanalysts and
engineers were not satisfied. All the IBM machines were designed for
others; NSA remained a poor relation in terms of computer architecture.
The cryptanalysts and even the plaintext/TA handlers sought a truly
\"perfect\" NSA machine, one that went beyond Sled in its originality
and powers. It was difficult to achieve.

(3\$3 There were differences between the mathematically oriented, the
operational cryptanalysts, and the data processors over the definition
of an \"NSA computer.\" In addition, the

extraordinary cost of a large custom-made machine kept it as an ideal
rather than a plan throughout the first half of the 1950s.

QH&f Only when the demand to conquer the Soviet problem and General
Canine\'s political skills came together in 1956 was there an
opportunity to create the great NSA computer. There were hints that
enough money would be made available to allow the Agency to free itself
from an architecture that was determined by the computer market place
rather than by crypto-needs. There also seemed enough to make up for the
Nomad tragedy. In response, old desires and ideas re-emerged.

(£) Concepts of a machine quite different from the commercial offerings,
one far beyond a universal comparator or a Sled, had been discussed
within the Agency (or its predecessors) since the late 1940s.

£8? Dissatisfaction with the von Neumann fundamentals had always been
evident, especially among those involved with \"production\" rather than
research. The type of programming an Atlas required seemed wasteful and
illogical to those who had become used to calling upon separate
special-function machines through commands plugged into high-speed
boards. Supported by mandates to avoid building single-purpose
computers, those who had grown up within the Agency, especially within
the SIS, had led the crusades for the late 1940s alternatives: Sled and
Abner\'s special hardwired features. Those were seen, however, as only a
first step towards a true cryptoarchitecture.29

(TS//SI) Soon after the Abner and Sled projects were under way,
explorations of great extensions of their special architecture began.
One central NSA machine seemed to be the goal. By 1954, the explorations
became formalized under the project name \"Farmer.\" The
technical/conceptual leader of Farmer was Ray Bowman, the old SIS hand
who had been so important to Abner\'s spe


TOP OCOnCTOOOMINTOnCL UQA, AU0, DAN ODR AND HZU/X1



cial ciypto-features. In the mid-1950s, he was leading the Agency\'s
analytic machine design group.30 He received much help on Fanner from
Samuel S. Snyder.

(3S//EH) In 1954 Bowman distributed a memorandum that was especially
pleasing to the cryptoproduction groups. In it he outlined his
architectural and procedural ideas. That first sketch gained wide
circulation within the Agency.31 It was followed by a series of papers
that expanded the Farmer ideas.32

(TS//SI) Bowman\'s Farmer was to be a large, all-purpose cryptanalytic
machine. At its center was to be a general-purpose computer that would
act as a traffic director, taking the place of the old plugboards found
on the tab-relay combinations and on Connie and Sled. That central
computer was to be the \"cop\" that brought order to the electrical
pathway (bus) that connected any number of special-purpose computers,
each of which was to perform a particular crypto-function. Important to
the goal of efficiency, the central computer would be smart enough to
allow more than one job to be processed at a time.

(3S} Bowman was not asking for technology, but for more ideas. Knowing
of the Agency\'s new long-term Dervish initiative to develop highspeed
components, he thought it best that Farmer be a five-year design
project. A follow-on effort starting in 1961 might lead to some
construction. Bowman also thought it best that Farmer remain an Agency
project, with all the design work to be done in-house. Only after the
architecture had been refined, and when ten to twenty megacycle
components were available, should outsiders be brought in.33

(TS//SI) Bowman\'s ideas and recommendations were widely circulated.
Many engineers and cryptanalysts joined his study group. The group
surveyed needs and methods within the Agency, leading to new
suggestions. It worked so diligently that it was able to issue a report
quite soon.

GBS//SI) The report contained a surprise. Another item had been added to
Farmer\'s wish list. It changed the nature and, to a significant degree,
Farmer\'s purpose. Now the Farmer project was to include a solution to
the data processing problem. It was to take up where Nomad failed as
well as be a super-Sled! \*\*

\(U) One Big Machine Beats Out Many Little Ones

(TQ//0I) Fortunately for Bowman and his overburdened aides, the report
stated that this new version of Farmer was not to be turned into
hardware until the technology to support it was developed.35

(3S} However, in 1955 there was growing pressure to turn ideas into
machines immediately. That made it difficult for Bowman\'s group to keep
Farmer a well-ordered design project. Criticism of the pace of the
project arose. There were rumblings that Bowman and Snyder were taking
on too much and that if a unique Agency machine were ever to appear, a
special outside group would be needed.

\(0) There were more fundamental criticisms. Joseph Eachus did not like
Farmer\'s architectural premises. He favored a type of machine that fit
his view of the role of research and mathematics in cryptanalysis. He
wanted computing brought close to and put under the control of users.
That \"distributed\" processing contrasted with a large and centralized
computing facility controlled by experts that \"data processors\"
favored.

(fi) The distributed processing advocates were able to begin a project
in 1954. As a result, two years later, the agency received the
customdesigned Rogue system from Logistics Research of California. It
had three \"outstarions\" attached to its small Alwac general-purpose
computer. A job could be submitted from any of the stations, saving
users much time. Rogue proved so attractive that a much more powerful
system, Rob Roy,




WMEmamamBmB inn nun mnnnn win in in

::: {style="width: 37.1764705882353%;"}
:::

\(U) Rob Boy

was ordered. Built around aBogart, it had five outstations, and was in
operation by early i960.36

Q¥S) There were much, much more ambitious plans for distributed
processing. In 1955 General Canine was convinced that what the Agency
needed to meet the Soviet challenge was superhigh-power mathematical
machines close by each cryptanalytic group. To achieve that, he made a
startling decision.

\$¥&) An order was cut to develop and manufacture anew version of the
ERA 1103Transistors were to replace tubes, thus allowing machines small
enough to be put close to, even on the desks of, codebreakers. Canine
looked forward to having forty of the new ERA devices within a short
time. ERA\'s new parent, RemingtonRand, perhaps thought the old navy-ERA
relationship was about to be reborn. Forty 1103s would cost at least
\$20,000,000.37

£8) But Remington did not get \$20,000,000. The contract for the new
1103 did not go to ERA, nor did it lead to the forty machines. After six
months of searching and negotiations, the Philco Corporation, which
already had a reputation for manufacturing high-speed transistors,
became the parent of the Solo project. RemingtonRand/ERA eventually
gained a small part of the project; it was called on to manufacture the
core memory for S0I0.38

£8) Despite Philco\'s advanced technology, Solo\'s development bogged
down. Cost and schedule overruns led to finger pointing among the
contractors and a startling price tag of \$1,000,000 for the first
desk-size copy of Solo.39 And it did not appear at the Agency until
spring 1959- Not surprisingly, only one Solo was manufactured.

4S-) There were other disappointments for those who favored distributed
general-purpose computing. Computer technology of the 1950s did not
favor small machines and remote computing of any type. A desk-size
LPG-30 the Agency purchased in 1957, for example, did not perform well
and had to be replaced.

\(G) Meanwhile, Bowman\'s Farmer progress reports continued to circulate
within the Agency. They received so much support that the criticisms by
\"mathematical\" types such as Joe Eachus were ignored. One important
reason for their dismissal was that Bowman\'s computer concepts received
the blessing of a special NSA Scientific Advisory Board committee. It
was charged with outlining a general-purpose flexible analytic machine
program.

\(G) After a year\'s study, in early 1955 the panel\'s chairman, John C.
McPherson of IBM, issued a report containing the design for \"the
perfect cryptanalytic machine.\"40

(6} McPherson\'s logical-technical recommendations were much like those
Ray Bowman had





suggested. That was because McPherson\'s panel was helped by one of his
IBM colleagues, S. W. Dunwell. Dunwell, who had done so much for the SIS
during World War II and who had become central to all of IBM\'s product
planning, had spent the previous two years on a special IBM assignment.
Stationed in Washington, D.C., he visited the major federal agencies
seeking knowledge of their future computer needs. Among his visits were
many to NSA where he \"brushed up on the requirements being postulated
by \[its\] staff members.\"41

(¥\$} Although McPherson\'s \"perfect cryptanalytic\" machine panel
agreed with the architectural ideas in the Farmer proposals, its
procedural ideas were very different The NSA Scientific Advisory
Board\'s panel recommended that the Agency stop dragging its feet and
turn ideas into hardware. McPherson offered IBM\'s help.43 It was not
long before that \"help\" arrived; it came within a few weeks.

\(U) An ERA by Any Other Name Is IBM

\(U) Stephen Dunwell had been sent to Washington on a mission. He and
other electronics advocates within IBM, such as Ralph Palmer, were again
trying to sidestep corporate opposition to computers. Despite the
success of the 700 series, management resisted investing in research or
large-scale development projects. To men like Dunwell, IBM seemed doomed
to take second place behind Remington-Rand. The corporation had
increased its research expenditures and had a program for technology
development, but it did not seem enough. Dunwell realized that the only
hope to keep IBM at the competitive edge was, as in the early 1950s, to
win government contracts for advanced computers.44 Those contracts
invariably included research subsidies.

\(U) The need to win contracts to support IBM research grew intense in
May 1955 when Remington-Rand triumphed over IBM and won the critical
LARC competition for an AEC super

computer. The LARC project would allow Remington to develop transistors
and to move far beyond its UNTVAC and 1103 computers.45 LARC also gave
Remington\'s Philadelphia group under Presper Eckert the chance to
redefine mainstream computer architecture.

\(U) LARC was to be super-fast because of its multiple processors. One
processor would control inputs and outputs; another would direct
arithmetic operations. Extremely important, LARC was to be able to
perform more than one task at a time. And it was to incorporate many new
technology-based advances. It was to have, for example, ultra-fast
memory fetches (0.5 microseconds).

\(U) Once the LARC contract was announced, IBM searched for its own
supercomputer contract. Its lead engineers were determined that their
coveted development program of the mid1950s would not die. To save it, a
machine had to be constructed to prove that its ideas and technologies
were viable. But IBM management did not want to risk a huge investment
on a \"demonstration\" computer.

\(U) As a result, an IBM representative appeared at NSA\'s headquarters
just weeks after Remington won the LARC contract. He came with a very
attractive offer.46 IBM, he said, would build a super-speed machine
tailored to the Agency\'s needs and have it in place by early 1959!

\(U) As details of the offer for the special NSA machine were revealed,
it seemed as if IBM had something the Agency could not refuse. For
\$2,500,000 NSA could have a computer with circuits two and one-half
times faster than the current standard; for \$3,500,000 it could have
one with more advanced transistors and circuits, ones that would run at
ten megacycles, or ten times the speed of the best components of 1955.
Either version of the machine would have a revolutionary core memory
that could bring information to the processors within 0.5 microseconds.





\(U) There was more to the offer: IBM had, its representative said, a
super-fast and high-capacity tape system. That system would be sold to
the Agency, as would the computer, at a bargain basement price. The
reason: IBM wanted a sophisticated user to test out its new components
and architectural schemes.

£S) For the Agency\'s R/D group, the IBM offer seemed a gift from
heaven. In mid-1955, Farmer\'s designers were terribly depressed. They
were under pressures to produce, but the Agency was unable to allocate
the people needed to continue the Farmer developments. Bowman and Snyder
were among the most frustrated. They knew that the Agency needed a
significant leap in computing technology to meet the Soviet crisis. But
they could do little to answer the cries for help from cryptanalytic
legends like Solomon Kullback.47 The frustration level was so high that
the R/D team seriously considered quitting the Agency to form a private
company, one that could explore the new crypto-machine ideas. 48

(38\") The IBM offer came at exactly the right moment for them. IBM,
they thought, could take over the Farmer project.

\(U) Is Half a Farmer Better Than,..?

£fi9) A follow-up visit by another IBM delegation, which included
engineers who had been at SIS during the war, linked the Farmer goals
more closely to IBM\'s offer.49 That tipped the balance at the Agency.
No time was lost. An inspection trip was made to the IBM plant by an NSA
team in mid-July.Within a few days alerter contract was drawn up for the
super-fast version of the IBM/NSA computer, one which, at a minimum,
could serve as the central switching station for a Farmer machine.50 IBM
was beginning to call that computer \"Stretch.\" NSA liked the name
\"Harvest\" for its machine.

(■TO) Then, the hope of rescuing Farmer encountered \"outsiders.\" To
please the DoD and

the politicians, Canine had brought in an outside scientist to head a
new research office. It had final say on large research and development
projects. It reviewed the IBM proposal and to the shock of men like Sam
Snyder, rejected it. The proposed arrangement with IBM was declared
improper. A government agency was not to support development work within
a corporation! Why should NSA pay for the development, for example, of
special high-speed transistors that would become part of IBM\'s
inventory?51

CFS-) Just then, another block to implementing Farmer appeared. Joseph
Eachus, frustrated over salaries, decided to leave the Agency and help
the new Honeywell-Raytheon combination turn their Datamatic computer
into a market contender. Snyder feared that even if the NSA research
office relented, Datamatic would demand to bid on the \"IBM\" work, thus
delaying any progress for so long that IBM might abandon its generous
offer.52

(0//0I) Neither IBM nor NSA\'s R/D group could accept an end to the
IBM-Farmer alliance. They were supported by Solomon Kullback.53 While he
was lobbying the research office, another prestigious IBM group rushed
to the Agency in the summer of 1955 to argue for their \"Stretch\"
proposal. Dunwell and the famous designer Gene Amdahl explained how
pipelining, an interrupt system, \"look-ahead,\" multiprocessing,
interleaved memories, and automatic indexing would make the new NSA
machine far ahead of its time. A multiprogramming ability, to run more
than one program at a time, was more than hinted at.

(8//SB The special IBM transistor and memory projects were described
again, and their role in making the IBM machine perhaps one hundred
times more powerful than existing computers, was explained.34

(3S) Sam Snyder\'s group presented new arguments to NSA\'s research
office, explaining that NSA had frequently subsidized work within pri





vate companies when it was to the benefit of the government.55 Solomon
Kullback was joined by Agency legends such as Abe Sinkov and Dale
Marston in emphasizing how much the Agency needed a technological
revolution.

(■€} The pressure worked but not all the way. It was decided the Agency
would support only a part of IBM\'s \"Stretch\" project. NSA agreed to
give IBM \$800,000 for eighteen months work on its high-speed core
memory explorations. As something like insurance for the future of the
special NSA computer, another \$800,000 was promised to support an IBM
team which was to design a computer that truly fit Agency needs, one
following the ideas in the Farmer proposals.56

\(U) St. Paul in Mohansic

(G-) Somehow the flexibility in contractual relationships that had
caused such furor when ERA was the favored company was becoming
acceptable again. Apparently the late 1955 contracts for the Silo
(memory) and Plantation (computer) projects were not put out to bid, and
IBM was allowed to retain patent rights to much of what was to be
developed.

(T9//3I) In fact, the Agency was creating a new version of an ERA, one
within IBM\'s walls. While IBM\'s engineers began what became a very
frustrating attempt to keep the promises about the high-speed memory and
transistors, a special and highly secure Plantation area was set up
within IBM\'s Mohansic laboratory. It was to be the new home of Farmer
as well as a companyrun NSA laboratory.

(T0//0I) The process of gaining high-level clearances for the Mohansic
crew was begun. At the same time, Sam Snyder made the rounds of NSA\'s
cryptanalytic and production groups requesting reports explaining their
secret methods and procedures. The reports were shipped to

Mohansic. IBM\'s laboratory soon had a library filled with NSA\'s most
precious secrets.57

(3S//S\*) The Plantation area became the Agency\'s computer think tank,
but this time its powerful figures were not the academic types who had
left \"G\" to found ERA.58 Nor were they the new applied scientists who
were making such a mark at centers such as Rand or Lincoln Labs.

(TS//SI) Those with practical orientations and those who had gained
their cryptologic experience in the SIS were very influential. Stephen
Dunwell, who had once led the SIS\'s machine room, directed IBM\'s
Stretch project and had much to do with defining what the special NSA
computer would belike. William Lawless, who had also been in charge of
the Agency machine production facilities, played a more direct role
within the \"lab.\" Two other exAgency experts were hired to help sort
through the crypto-procedures to identify common and essential
cryptanalytic functions. Samuel Sehmitt, a cryptanalyst/statistician,
and the mathematician George Cramer, who had worked for ERA for some
years, became invaluable. They gave much advice to the lead IBM
engineers, Paul S. Herwitz, James Pomerene, and Fred Brooks.59

\(U) But IBM\'s computer designers could not just attend to NSA\'s
advice. The Stretch designers, it turned out, had to please other
agencies and bow to the marketplace.

\(U) Bucks Talk: the Favored Sister Gets the Attention

\(U) Just as the Plantation group began to consider how to turn the
Farmer ideas into hardware, IBM received some good news - at least it
was good for the corporation. Determined to displace Remington-Rand, IBM
had formalized its advanced work in late 1955, given it the name
\"Stretch,\" and scoured the country for more government contracts. What
IBM had to offer was daring. They promised to make advances in





underlying technology and in architecture at the same time, something
that would allow the company to leap frog Remington-Rand\'s LARC.

\(U) For those with supercomputer needs, like physicists in the AEC, the
Stretch program was enticing. They convinced the agency to pay IBM
\$4,300,000 for a super-calculating computer for Los Alamos. Soon, IBM
had hopes that several other orders would follow for a similar
machine.60

\(U) The AEC Stretch became the focus of attention at IBM, and it was not
long before a machine designed for physicists\' number-crunching had an
impact on what NSA\'s machine could be. Perhaps as early as 1956 and
certainly by the time IBM and NSA were negotiating the contract for the
construction of a machine in late 1957, IBM had decided that it would be
too expensive to create a unique cryptanalytic computer. If NSA wanted a
computer, a central part of it would have to be a clone of the Los
Alamos design, including its high-speed and expensive floatingpoint
arithmetic processor.

OSd NSA had become a stepsister again despite its original belief that
IBM was to build \"a machine designed primarily for Agency needs.\"61
What NSA was calling \"Harvest\" was not going to be totally unique.

\(U) A Data Factory

(3//9I) Non-uniqueness also marked the NSA-IBM attempt to give Nomad a
second life. NSA had its hopes raised in early 1955 when IBM
representatives described the company\'s progress on its high-speed,
high-density tapes62 and an automated tape machine that would eliminate
the need for human intervention in the selection and mounting of data.
Exploration of such a system had been conducted as part of the
corporation\'s AEC projects.

£S\#fir) When the special design group at Mohansic reaffirmed NSA\'s
need for a mass data processing capability, the Agency\'s engineers
argued that NSA should help IBM develop what would become known as the
Tractor tape system. In response, the Agency gave IBM \$300,000 for
additional research, hoping the corporation\'s engineers would conquer
the remaining problems.63

(S//S13 If the hopes for Tractor were realized, the NSA Harvest computer
could become the desired super data processor the Agency needed. The
tape system would allow the creation of a centralized database to
replace the thousands of separate magnetic tapes and tens of millions of
IBM cards that were overwhelming the Agency. As significant, with
Tractor, Harvest might well become a giant complex to replace all the
Agency\'s tabulators and many of its special-purpose devices.

CK//Of) In fact, many hoped that Harvest would become NSA\'s data
factory. Once in place, it would allow great efficiencies in the use of
manpower and resources and make centralized management possible. Users
would submit jobs and receive their output on a regular twenty-four hour
basis.6\* The Agency was very concerned about information management, so
much so that it held a pathbreaking conference in 1959 that helped
define the emerging field of database management.65

CiS//aij\" The influence of those who saw NSA\'s future in terms of data
processing reached into IBM\'s secret development laboratory. Their data
processing demands were merged with IBM\'s decision to mold NSA\'s
\"perfect\" computer to the corporation\'s need to minimize the costs of
its Stretch computer program. All that was reflected in the Plantation
report the Mohansic group issued in May 1957




PL. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)


\(U) Not a Farmer, a Nomad

{S-) That first Harvest Manual accepted the AEC Stretch as the NSA
system\'s centerpiece, it gave data processing a prominent place, and it
recommended that implementing many of the architectural ideas of the
1955 Farmer proposals be deferred if not abandoned.66

£S) .NSA\'s \"special\" computer had become a sophisticated appendage to
a Stretch, rather than Stretch being a \"traffic cop\" for a cluster of
separate special-purpose units linked through a data bus.67

(-¥S) The special cryptanalytic portion of Harvest, its attachment, or
\"bump,\" was to concentrate on a few general cryptanalytic tasks. It
was not to be aimed at particular systems, such as the new Soviet \|
\~\| or the

I I Instead, IBM\'s team recommended

that the \"bump\" be a very sophisticated and augmented version of the
Streaming units in Abner.68 The Streaming unit mimicked the logic of the
older comparators.

(JgfThe Harvest \"attachment\" was to allow high-speed access to any
\"bit\" or combination of bits in a stream of data, was to offset two
streams, and was to perform the traditional counts and threshold tests
used in statistical cryptanalysis. It was to be able to identify and
perhaps correct garbles, to perform various types of modular arithmetic
on the two data streams to produce a third stream, and it was to have a
very advanced table lookup feature to facilitate language weighting. By
a clever use of a base address and the characters encountered in a text,
digraph or other language frequency weights could be referenced and
applied without having to wait while a unique memory address was
created.69

£6) Another special memory feature was recommended to help those
involved with codebreaking rather than cipher work. By simplifying how a
bit in memory was \"filled\" and located, fre

quency distributions and indicators of the existence or nonexistence of
a group could be tallied at ultra-fast speeds. To facilitate all types
of processing, the \"attachment\" was to have special ways of indexing
-ways to address and access memory.

70

£€} The mid-1957 Mohansic report admitted that the \"attachment\"
demanded a special type of program, one that might have to be different
from the one used on the main Stretch computer. In addition, the
\"attachment\" would need a complex electronic version of the kind of
plugboard program that controlled Sled and other special machines.

\(G) The recommendations included some architectural possibilities.
Multiprocessing/programming was one. It was thought it would be possible
to have Stretch performing one or more tasks while the \"attachment\"
was in operation and that the attachment itself might, as the Farmer
outline had recommended, perform several jobs concurrently.71

(G}-Despite the complexity of Harvest and its deviation from the
original Farmer ideas, NSA\'s in-house evaluation group gave general
approval to the design. But it asked for some additional information.
When IBM submitted a revised plan later in 1957, it was accepted.
Implicit in the acceptance was the idea that the Stretch with the
attached NSA \"bump\" would be able to access a centralized database.
Harvest was to be as much a Nomad as a Sled.

(&) The evaluation group\'s approval was needed because the IBM contract
proposal was quite ambitious. It was no longer one for \$3,500,ooo, but
for more than \$10,000,000. \^ That raised some questions within the
Agency.

(&) But concerns about Harvest were not limited to its increased price.
And they began to be





voiced before the Plantation report had been formally released in
1957.73

\(U) Engineering Is Not Science, at Least to

the SAB

B\*} To the embarrassment of its NSA parents, Harvest came under fire
from the Agency\'s Science board and, later, from the godfathers of
cryptanalytic automation, Joseph Wenger and Howard Engstrom. Their
criticisms encouraged others. The Harvest debate became tied to more
fundamental issues within the Agency. Asa result, in the late 1950s
there was a replay of the standoff between science types and operational
cryptanalysts that had frustrated Hooper and Wenger in the 1930s.
Harvest became a battleground for larger questions about SIGINTs future.
Central to the debate was the issue of who should control NSA The
science boards and the \"old-timers\" had many disputes over
technological and science policies.

ffS) Joseph Wenger had not expected that when he established an advisory
board (SCAG) for OP-20-G after World War II. In fact, he thought the
board would prevent frictions. He purposely filled it with men who would
be sensitive to day-to-day needs within the Agency. His appointees had
direct experience with cryptanalysis and its technology.

\^B8) Such appointments continued after AFSA was created. That proved
useful. When the Department of Defense, which had become enamored with
the new applied scientists, pressured AFSA to give science an important
voice in its work, the old SCAG group was used as a means offending off
unwanted outside influence.74

■£») When NSA was formed and SCAG was turned into the Science Advisory
Board (SAB), its membership looked much like before. It played a crucial
role in protecting the Agency during the first rounds of outside
review.75 As important, the first NSA boards refrained from interfering
in

Agency affairs. Its members saw their role as one of offering help when
asked.76

-\$&) But as the Agency failed to conquer the Soviet problem and as the
Department of Defense increasingly called on scientists, the board
changed. Its membership shifted towards relative outsiders, it was
allowed to take independent action, and it was asked to perform some
rather onerous tasks. By the mid-1950s, it and its host of new advisory
subcommittees were directed to review Agency operations and to devise
specific plans for technological advancement.

63\") The board was frequently asked to preempt outside interference by
conducting reviews of Agency programs and achievements.77 Although the
board continued to serve as a buffer against hostile outsiders, its new
role led to resentment among the Agency\'s staff.78 Agency personnel
thought many SAB recommendations were unrealistic and, in some
instances, insulting. In the mid-1950s, frictions between the board and
the \"insiders\" intensified, rather than diminished, when the Agency
was told to bring in new blood in the form of a civilian deputy director
and a new deputy for research.

■fjS) Following the directives of the DoD, instead of promoting one of
the in-house group to the supergrade research directorship, an outsider
was brought in. It was thought that someone with a range of scientific
contacts, experience in designing long-term programs, and a bundle of
fresh ideas would invigorate the Agency. Asa result, Solomon Kullback,
who had been the Technical Director of Research and Development since
1949, was assigned to a second-place slot in the revamped Agency
research office.79

\(U) The new research director, Alva B. Clark, seemed the ideal man from
the ideal background. Anelectrical engineer/scientist, he had pulled
himself through the ranks of AT&T to become a vice president at what was
regarded as the premier research facility in the world, Bell




TOP RFPRFTVfrnMINTV/REl USA, AUS, CAM GBR AND NJU/X1

Laboratories. Bell Labs was unique because it conducted applied as well
as abstract research, a blend that DoD\'s leaders thought was vital to
meet NSA\'s challenges. Clark arrived at the Agency in early 1954,
reviewed many programs, helped reshape the Scientific Advisory Board,
and suggested new initiatives.

(■G\^Many of his decisions did not fit with the ways of the Agency,
however. One of them was his rejection of the proposed use of the Farmer
project monies to support IBM\'s Stretch efforts. Alva Clark did not get
to see the results of his decisions: he died just two months after he
finally signed off on the Plantation and Silo projects.80

£G}-The Agency employees hoped the next director would not resist a full
Harvest program and that he would be more willing to follow the advice
of the cryptanalytic old hands on other matters. They lobbied to have an
\"insider\" appointed.

\(U) Howard Engstrom, the man who had directed OP-20-G\'s RAM projects
and then became central to ERA, and who later had served on the
Scientific Advisory Board throughout the

::: {style="width: 28.459427675421406%;"}
:::

\(U) Howard Engstrom

1950s, was contacted. In late 1956, although his health was failing, he
agreed to leave his position as vice president of Remington-Rand
(recently absorbed by the navy\'s good friend, the Sperry Corporation)
and take over the Agency\'s research office.

(T0//0I) Engstrom appeared to be an \"insider\" with an appreciation of
the practical side of codebreaking, its technologies, and the need to
keep high-level strategic cryptanalysis within NSA81 But Engstrom was
more an \"outside\" scientist than had been thought; he remained
committed to the belief that cryptanalytic problems could be conquered
through scientific, mathematical research. For him, data processing,
\"busts,\" and crude statistical methods were expedients that had to be
replaced, not something on which to base a nation\'s SIGINT future.82
And he still believed in the possibility of a Soviet Ultra if something
like \"G\'s\" World War II research branch, which had brought the
nation\'s brightest and most energetic young academic mathematicians
together, could be recreated.

(S3 That belief was shared by his old \"G\" colleagues and by many of
the high science types on the SAB. Since the demise of the hopes that
ERA would be a crypto think tank, \"G\'s\" alumni had made a series of
recommendations for the creation of an independent research
organization. In the early 1950s, Howard Campaigne lobbied for the
establishment of a free-wheeling pure research branch within AFSA. Its
members should, he argued, be free of any operational duties and be
allowed to be self-directing.83 C. B. Tompkins sought a totally
independent organization which would attract academics. He suggested
that it be a subdivision of California\'s Rand Corporation.

£K\>//0I) Similar ideas were discussed among the SAB\'s members. The
ideas grew more specific as the board engaged more academics, such as
the fathers of information science, Warren





Weaver and Claude Shannon, and brought in Cold War university managers
like Jay Forrester and A. G. Hill of MITs Sage Project and Lincoln
Laboratory.84

\(U) Forrester and Hill had forged new relationships between
technology-based schools and the military. At the same time, others were
creating the means to bring institutions specializing in more
traditional academic subjects into the world of secret work. Among them
was a close friend of NSA, John von Neumann.

(3¥r) Since his early days on NSA\'s advisory boards, von Neumann had
argued for direct links to universities. 85 By the mid-1950s he
recommended the emerging Institute for Defense Analysis as a model that
NSA should follow if it wanted cryptanalysis to achieve intellectual
respectability. He also wanted NSA to support fundamental research in
fields of interest to SIGINT (and John von Neumann). He constantly
argued that NSA had to step in and fill the research gap in computer
technology and logic. He wanted NSA to fund expensive research into
ultra-high-speed circuitry and computer design.86

(TS//SI) Such recommendations began to be turned into a program after
the Hoover Commission\'s findings were released. The Hoover committee
recommended an all-out effort against Russia\'s codes and ciphers and
wanted it to be a scientifically based one. The commission could not be
ignored. It and its friends on the SAB were powerful and had the ear of
the nation\'s leaders.87

(TS//ST) The Hoover Commission\'s views fit with the predisposition of
the research types in the Agency, especially those who had come to NSA
from \"G.\" They were poised and ready to take advantage of the
potentials of the Hoover report.

(TO//01) By June 1956, the \"G\" veteran Jack Holtwick and his team had
completed the Recommendations for A Full Scale Attack on the Russian
High Level Systems.\^ The report, with sections based on the
contributions of other \"G\" alumni, such as mathematician Richard
Liebler (another University of Illinois graduate), asked for millions of
dollars for an intensified traditional NSA effort to find a pure
solution. The emphasis was on the use of high science and, importantly,
scientists. Although Holtwick, with the advice of the SIS legend Abe
Sinkov, asked for \$17,000,000 for new computers and an additional 900
people for an in-agency program; he requested even more for fundamental
electronics research and for the creation of a cryptanalytic Los
Alamos.89 He wanted long-term research into super-fast computer
components. Implicitly, Harvest was rejected.

CTS//SI) Importantly, Holtwick recommended that a parallel \"outside\"
academic program be set up to tackle the Soviet problems. A simple
expansion of the Mohansic laboratory was rejected. A Los Alamos type of
program would call for a \"campus\" and an academic elite.

(TS//SI) There was no immediate action on Holtwick\'s proposal for a
massive in-house program, but when Howard Engstrom took over the
research office at NSA in late 1956, he became a determined advocate for
the \"outside\" portions of Holtwick\'s plans. Sensing that the
Eisenhower administration would provide needed support, Engstrom pushed
for the Holtwick alternative to Harvest and the IBM-based
crypto-research. The Agency began to refer to his program as
\"Freehand\" as Engstrom lobbied the Defense Department for a huge
special appropriation.

\(U) You Can Take Science Out of the Agency, But Can You \....

(TS//SI) Freehand was not a complete plan in late 1956,90 but Ralph
Canine wanted it implemented before he was forced to retire. The CIA\'s





PL. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)

drive to at least share in the control ofSIGENT, the failure to predict
the Hungarian invasion, and the lack of progress against the Soviet
ciphers threatened NSA91 More fundamental, the technological advances in
all types of code and ciphermaking seemed to have gone beyond the
Agency\'s technical capabilities. Even the Larc and Stretch technologies
seemed less than adequate to save NSA92

(3S//&F) Canine needed action. He quickly began to muster the political
backing the Agency required. He summoned the Scientific Board to an
emergency meeting in Howard Engstrom\'s office on October 8,1956. He
informed them of his feeling that the need for intelligence was as
critical as in World War II and that another Ultra had to be found. He
requested the board to consider what had already been embedded in
Project Freehand. He wanted something else. He asked its members to
provide answers to questions from President Eisenhower\'s office as to
what could be done about the Soviet high-level problem if the Agency
\"were not limited by money, people, etc.\"

(TS//01J Canine had already gained the ear of Eisenhower\'s science
advisors, including Vannevar Bush. They were supportive of the outside
high-tech, high-science initiatives within Freehand, and Canine wanted
to report back to them with aboard-approved plan before they might
change their minds.93

(T0//0I) NSA\'s Science Board listened to presentations on the
\"science\" components in the initial Freehand wish list. There was to
be an exploration of the possible contributions of mathematics and the
probable impact of more and better mathematicians within the Agency.
There would be an R&D technology program to create computers 1,000 times
faster than the best of the mid-1950s and an outside parallel
cryptanalytic effort against the Soviet cipher machines.94

(TS//0I) There was also something rather sad. The board learned that the
crypto-technology tables had been turned. No longer was the United
States a dependent waiting for the secrets of the British Bombe to be
sent from GC&CS. Millions were to be spent to provide Britain with a new
computer so that it could continue its anti\| \~lresearch.

GES//STJ The board was informed that the secretary of defense had
already given his general approval for the parts of Freehand to be
conducted outside of the Agency. Then they were told something rather
ominous and certainly insulting to the old-timers in the Agency. The DoD
was withholding its approval for the Holtwick/Sinkov request to vastly
increase NSA\'s workforce and its stock of computers. The DoD wanted to
see evidence that NSA\'s staff was making progress before it granted any
more funds for a \"business as usual\" attack.95

(TS//SI) The board shared the DoD\'s views. They favored abstract
\"outside\" work, not the application ofmore-of-the-same cryptanalysis.
They were especially enthusiastic about the idea of a mathematical
research program. They wanted a Big Science of cryptanalysis to be
created. And they felt it could flourish only if it was outside the
Agency! Although the most vocal science advocate, John von Neumann, was
ill and could not join in the deliberations, the SAB went beyond what
Canine and Engstrom had brought to them. While declaring that
Engstrom\'s idea for a crypto-Manhattan project be immediately
implemented, they wanted something more: commitment to abstract
mathematical research free of any specific problems. Howard Engstrom
also appreciated abstract research, but he and his supporters within the
Agency wanted that cryptanalytic \"Los Alamos\" to be a massive applied
project for the Soviet\| \~

Tproblem.

-£FB//0I)\" There were variations on the Los Alamos theme, and it
received different names, such as \"Project Parallel\" of \"Manhattan,\"
but the

TOP 8ECWET//COMINT/mCL USA, AUS, CAW OBR AMP HZU/XI P L 86\"36

EO 3.3(h)(2)




essentials remained constant. The Soviet threat, Engstrom argued, could
be conquered if he had the right people working under the right
conditions. With a call to duty by the White House, to the nation\'s
leading scientists, with a budget of \$5,000,000 a year for five years,
with a re-creation of the atmosphere of the old \"G\" group and with the
project\'s scientists free from bureaucratic control, a Soviet Ultra
could, he thought, be created.

GES//Sij Engstrom began to win converts on the board and, importantly,
within the D0D.96 He obtained a firm commitment to funding for the
\"outside\" parts of Freehand. \$25,000,000 for \"Lightning,\" the
hardware development task, was promised. It was to create anew
generation of computer technologies: circuits 1,000 times faster than
the computer industry was producing were central goals. The DoD promised
that more money was to come when the plans for the \"Los Alamos\"
research center were completed.

\(U) Engstrom\'s next, and very difficult, task was to turn the Freehand
dollars into programs.

rS) Although IBM\'s John C. McPherson resigned as chairman of SAB in
late 1956, thus helping to avoid charges of conflict of interest, and
although IBM had established a high-science program under the well-known
Cold War scientist Emanuel Piore, little thought was given to placing
the responsibility for Freehand in IBM\'s hands.97 There was some
mention of IBM as a possible site for circuit explorations, but
McPherson\'s declaration that he thought the 1,000 megacycle goal
unrealistic and the tensions over the Harvest program caused the Agency
to look elsewhere.98

\#8) The question of how to run the Freehand technology program was
especially troublesome. There was much at stake. A repeat of Nomad would
be a disaster. Howard Engstrom felt that NSA did not have the staff
necessary to direct the \$25,000,000 project, nor was it, he said, even

capable of supervising contractors. He wanted the Lightning project
turned over to an outside prime contractor who would handle all details.
There were discussions of using MITs Lincoln Laboratory, but its head
and other SAB advisors, including Jay Forrester, indicated the lab would
not accept the responsibility. Forrester suggested the Agency create a
new university consortium. But when universities, such as MIT and
Chicago, were called on, Lightning did not receive a friendly welcome.99

\<S) No Lightning center could be created in 1956. The Los Alamos and
longer term mathematical research projects seemed to have found a home,
however.

j\^ST) Through one of the SAB members, the Agency had already
established a relationship with the General Electric Corporation. After
some discussions, GE presented its plan to create and house at least the
Los Alamos (Parallel) project for the Soviet\| \|problems, if not the
long

range mathematical program. The corporation wanted to have a workforce
of 200 people. Eighty were to be highly qualified scientific
researchers, and thirty of them were to be the most eminent of
America\'s scholars. They\\were to be joined by a cadre from NSA\'s
research group.100

£3PS) General Electric\'slplans were attractive, but they were not
turned into a contract in 1956. Despite Engstrom\'s enthusiasm, the NSA
regulars resisted a commitment to any plan that would take its most
important work \"outside.\"101 With Engstrom unable to create a captive
corporation for the technological, side of Freehand CProject Lightning),
all Freehand was put on hold.

£BS) The halt came just as another threatening Agency review was to
begin! The predictions about that 1957 Robertson investigation were not
encouraging. It was known \\that one of the Robertson commission\'s
mandates was to cut military and intelligence budgets. With so little to
show in terms of results against its prime target,


TOP BCCRCTOOOMINTORCL UQA, AUG, OAN ODR AND NZL//X1

P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)


TOP 3ECRET//COMINT7/RCL U3A, AUQ, OAN QDR AND NZU/X1

with the Agency\'s super-advocate, Ralph Canine, retiring, and with so
many threats to take highlevel cryptanalysis out of NSA, 1957 looked
bleak.

£TS\>- Engstrom\'s office reconsidered Freehand and how to organize its
work. At the same time, SAB began its own new look at the two main
Freehand proposals and its own favorite, a pure mathematics think-tank.
Within the Agency there was another attempt to establish how much NSA
itself should be expanded. The need to hurry was clear.

\(U) Almost in Science - Would Lightning Be the Other Harvest?

(T3//3I) Engstrom eventually devised away to organize the \"1,000
megacycle\" Lightning program. Because of the way he did it, he pushed
NSA over a sensitive bureaucratic line in 1957. The Agency became a
sponsor of basic research within industry.102

(TS//SI) Lightning was a bold and expensive program, but out of it,
Engstrom predicted, would come a machine 1,000 times more powerful than
the current ones. It would be powerful enough to employ even the old
unsophisticated exhaustivetrial crypto-techniques of the 1940s against
the Soviet cipher machines.103

(3\$) Ralph Canine had laid much of the political groundwork for
Lightning. He had turned President Eisenhower into a believer.104 Ike
lent his name to the project, allowing Engstrom to convince the DoD that
NSA be given complete control over Lightning. NSA was able to dodge the
DoD rules that fundamental research be administered by a central
agency.105

(\*FS) After a few months of rethinking how to organize the project, in
June 1957, without waiting for the rest of Freehand to begin, Engstrom
got Lightning under way. The project had been changed during the
previous months. To reduce it to a manageable size, it was limited to
the devel

opment of technology. The ambitious architectural and communications
explorations that were part of the original Lightning plans were put
off.

(\^ Howard Campaigne was given overall Lightning responsibility.106
Along with many others, he interpreted Lightning as a project aimed at
the eventual \"development of THE computer\" NSA needed to meet the
Hoover and Robertson commission\'s demands for results on the highlevel
Soviet problem. He hoped a machine would be in the planning stages no
later than 1962.

(TO//01) Others, who were less accepting of the idea that an Agency
project could lead to a revolution in electronics, thought that
Lightning would always be more of a speculative research than a
development project, at least for many years. They were certain that it
would be impossible to deliver a machine 100 times more powerful than
the proposed Harvest, and they were anxious about any hints that
operational machines would come out of the project by the early or
mid-1960s. They thought that a 1,000megacycle computer was, at very
best, a wellintentioned dream.107

(TS//SI) Making too many promises about an NSA computer would, they
thought, undermine the Agency\'s credibility. But Lightning began with a
1960s supercomputer as a goal. Because of that, the Agency wanted to
keep control of all aspects of Lightning. That proved impossible,
however. Engstrom was again unable to create a captive corporation, was
unable to find a company to supervise the entire project, and was unable
to hire enough people within NSA to run a tightly controlled program.108
Lightning had to be parceled out among a number of contractors.109

(TS//3I) But Engstrom devised a strategy to get as much as possible from
an essentially unsupervised project. He decided to fund a few of the
most advanced research projects on ultra-highspeed components in
industrial and university research centers. He hoped the additional
funds




TOP OCORCTOOOMINTOrcCL UQA, AUG, OAN ODR AND N2UfX1

would lead to the emergence of technologies by the 1960s. NSA\'s role
would be confined to financing the intensified research.

(TC//CI) Many research centers were contacted before cooperative
partners were found. After hopes that Bell Laboratories would play a
role dwindled, IBM, RCA, and Sperry-Rand became Lightning\'s core. They
were selected because they had already developed expertise in three of
what NSA\'s engineers thought were the \"technologies of tomorrow\"
(cryotron, thin film, and high-speed transistors) and because they were
trusted to supervise their own work. MTT, Philco, Kansas State, and Ohio
State agreed to take small projects.

(TS//SI) With the exception of a bit of work at MIT, all the contracts
were for technological development. The design and construction of the
Lightning computer was pushed into the background, and only the barest
sketch of what it might be emerged within the Agency. But that sketch
reflected the long-term ambitions of the in-house Freehand group: to
develop and apply more science and mathematics to cryptanalysis. In
general outline, the \"1,000\" had become a mathematical supercomputer.
By September 1957 the lightning computer was to be \"a general-purpose
machine\" without special NSA circuits (which could be added later), and
it would be built at an undetermined time after the research and
development phases of Lightning were completed. That made IBM\'s Stretch
something of a competitor to Lightning. Fortunately for the Harvest
advocates within the Agency, a Lightning machine was, they thought,
years away.110

(TB//8I) But the research phase of the Lightning project was
progressing. Because the selected companies had already been working on
the technologies, NSA\'s \"research\" began immediately. But as the
implications of the goal of a 1,000,000,000 pulse-per-second circuit
were confronted, there was worry that the program would implode.

CBB//0I) An oscilloscope that could measure pulses in ranges anywhere
near the desired rate could not be found. Worse, to reach the 1,000meg
rate demanded that components be much smaller than first thought -
submicroscopic in size. The basic laws of physics dictated it. That
created more than a challenge in an era when \"microelectronics\" meant
the ability to put the equivalent of a few transistors on a tiny glass
plate. The expensive \"solid state\" circuits of the era held, at most,
100 components. It was to be more than a decade before a miniature
memory circuit could hold sixty-four bits of information.111 Large size
meant slow speeds. It would be a generation before standard circuits ran
at 100 megs.

£ES) Lightning\'s researchers looked at all the possibilities for
microcircuitry. They even explored what became the world\'s solution to
miniaturization, what we now call \"chip\" technology. They found no
immediate solution; but after a few months on the first exploratory
phases, they all reported that \"the prospects of achieving the goal of
a kilomegacycle operation in the not too distant future were good.\"112
There were reports that a miniature circuit the size of a pinhead and
with 1,000 components was possible.\"3 Contracts were renewed. The
researchers focused on the technologies most likely to produce results.
Some of them seem strange given 1990\'s solid-state technology.

(=£8} One contractor investigated the use of \"resonant\" circuits while
RCA worked on the tunnel diode.114 Meanwhile, IBM pursued a dream that
NSA\'s Dudley Buck had explored and which other researchers worked on
through to the 1980s, \"cryotrons.\" Cryotrons were miniature elements
operating at a temperature of absolute zero. Such \"cold\" circuits
would take advantage of a fundamental physical property: With no heat,
there is little or nor resistance in certain types of superconducting
metal.

4S} Cryotrons demanded microcircuits, ones so small that if laid on a
fingertip, they would not


xfp ccppFTiirmmrniPB. nt-A hup r«\>i rnn Aim win.im



be noticed. IBM\'s route to such circuits in the late 1950s was through
the thin film process rather than through \"chip\" etching. Very, very
fine layers of metal were plated on a tiny glass base until a circuit
was \"painted.\" The component was then submerged in liquid helium.\"5

£S-) The other major Lightning contractor, Sperry-Rand, concentrated on
a more mundane use of \"thin film\" technology. It was developing it for
use in room temperature circuits. The company was already making thin
film memories to replace magnetic cores. The new memories were 1,000
times faster than Bogart\'s and much cheaper to make because laying down
thin film was automated. But Rand\'s circuits were very far from the
1,000 megacycle goal.116

(jS-)-Sperry-Rand\'s work was continued by the Agency, but the research
at some other Lightning contractors was terminated within a few years,
perhaps too much hand wringing by the Agency. The research on ways to
speed transistors and how to manufacture integrated circuits (chips) was
dropped in 1959. NSA decided that since others might explore the chip
and high-speed transistors, the Agency should sponsor only the cryotron,
thin film, and resonant circuit research.

£TG//flfl By late 1959 there was so much faith in those three
technologies that thoughts of applying them emerged. There was a
resurgence in the hope for a Lightning computer. Despite the investment
in Harvest, a group at NSA was given permission to create the
\$10,000,000 Redman project. It was to begin in 1961-2, was to evaluate
Lightning\'s results and design, and was perhaps to build an Agency
cryptanalytic supercomputer. \"7

(TS//SI) Redman was an indication that a significant group within NSA
had maintained its faith in mathematical cryptanalysis. But there was
not a consensus about the role of cryptanalysis. In 1957, just as
Lightning began, some influ

ential outsiders expressed a very different view of the future of
cryptanalysis and NSA.

\(U) What Kind of Friend Are You, Dr. Baker?

(TS//SI) The growing fears of Soviet capabilities and intentions and the
apparent inability of SIGINT to penetrate the \"Iron Curtain\" led to
the creation of yet another NSA review panel in 1956. It was perhaps the
most powerful one that had ever been called on and the one most directly
connected to the Cold War\'s scientific elite. William O. Baker, vice
president of Bell Laboratories, who was one of the nation\'s \"stars\"
of applied research, was asked to head the review. He consented, but
only on the condition that President Eisenhower grant him extraordinary
powers. The investigation was to be under the White House, and its
reports were to go directly to the president, his science advisors, and
the Presidential Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

(TG//3,f) Baker\'s charge was broad, but it had a focus. He was to
inform the president of NSA\'s and cryptanalysis\' potential. Would a
Soviet Ultra soon appear or should the nation put its faith in spy
planes, satellite photoreconnaissance, and, if possible, covert actions
by the CIA?118

CES//SI) When the prestigious Baker panel was formed, both the research
and operational types in the Agency thought they were to face a group of
like-minded friends. Baker had abackground in intelligence and was
already well known to NSA\'s Science Advisory Board and the Agency\'s
top-level administrators. Although he was not \"told all\" about the
Agency\'s work, he was welcomed into NSA. But the assumption that the
Baker panel would protect the Agency was wrong!

0B8//SI) Baker took Stanford Hooper\'s ideas about the relationship of
academia to COMINT to the extreme. He even went beyond the Los Alamos
and Parallel ideas.

IWbibCKblJJUJMINUJKbL UbA, AUi\>, IAN GBR AND NZUJXI




(T3//3I) He recommended that NSA be stripped of its most important
asset, scientific cryptanalysis. Baker and his advisors were committed
to science and scientists, but they wanted them outside of and away from
the control of NSA.

(TS//SI) That led to a vigorous protest by Agency insiders. In the early
1930s OP-20-G\'s cryptanalysts ignored Hooper\'s \"computers\"; in the
late 1950s, after Baker\'s recommendations became known, there was much
more than foot dragging.

(TS\#8i3 Well before Baker\'s Top Secret final report was formally
released, word of what it contained reached down into the Agency. The
most frightening part of the report was the conclusion that
communications security, especially the Soviets\', had far outdistanced
cryptanalysis. There would be no more \"great\" intercepts. The report
insisted that the Agency recognize the strength of the Soviet I I
systems and stop

hoping that its cryptanalytic! methods or its machines would ever unlock
thism. More-of-thesame cryptanalysis, Baker concluded, would never work.
Nor would a more-qf-the-same relationship between science and \|the
Agency contribute much.\"9 Baker declared that the age of heroic
cryptanalysis had ended.!

(T0//0I) Baker stated that NSA should focus on low-level systems and on
integrating the fragments discovered in them. That was insulting to
Agency regulars. It was unacceptable toNSA\'s \"greats.\" Samuel Snyder,
the ijnan in charge of Harvest, reported that when the legendary William
F. Friedman, \"the man who broke Purple,\" heard of Baker\'s
recommendation, he reacted emotionally and threatened to go to the White
House. Like others, Friedman did not want the Agency to be confined to
being just a data processor.120 For Friedman, without cryptanalysis
there could be no NSA

PL. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)

CE8//0r)There was more to the Baker report, and it was not pleasant.
Baker recommended that the Science Advisory Board be reorganized and its
outsiders given a much more direct and regular voice in Agency policies.
By implication, NSA\'s researchers had not done a good job.

(TS//SI) Even the Agency\'s attempt to join in the development of
advanced computer technology was criticized. The Baker panel urged the
Agency to drop Lightning and to end its role in Stretch. Let industry
and other agencies deal with the general and fundamental problems, he
said.

\^GffSfy Baker wanted the Agency involved in only two types of computer
development. The most important was to continue the automation of
signals gathering. He urged that the \"front end\" ofSIGINT be automated
immediately. After that was done, he wanted the Agency to concentrate on
the creation of special-purpose computers to handle the torrent of
\"bits\" the new front-end would provide. And that new NSA front-end was
to include something that would truly make NSA as much or more of a data
processing shop than a cryptanalytic agency. Baker wanted NSA to handle
ELINT, the signals gathered from enemy radar and other electronic
systems.121

(TS//SI) Worse for NSA\'s regulars was Baker\'s interpretation of what
Howard Engstrom was promoting - the \"Los Alamos\" cryptanalytic project
to work on the Soviet problems in parallel with the Agency analysts.
Although the General Electric plan had withered, Engstrom continued to
want a parallel effort.

(TS//SI) Baker\'s recommendation went much further, dangerously so. He
sought to take advanced cryptanalysis completely out of NSA The Agency
was to turn over the Soviet and all other major unsolved systems. He
wanted an applied mathematical center, one with very expanded powers.
Filled with the best outsiders and some of the outstanding
mathematicians from the Agency, it would have jurisdiction over




all the high-level problems, as well as the duty of exploring the
frontiers of mathematical cryptanalysis. Based on the belief that even
the best analysts were unable to concentrate on long-term challenges if
they were within an operating agency, cryptanalysis, he said, should be
removed to an independent campus.\"

fra//Stj That think tank was to have a wide reach. It should be the site
for advanced computer work as well as codebreaking. Although emphasizing
the proposed center\'s role in software development, hardware design was
not excluded.

frD//GI} Agency representatives accepted the idea of a quasi-independent
think tank - an extension of the older mathematics workshops that dealt
with abstract problems.122 But they argued that turning over the
high-level problems to outsiders would be a tragic mistake. They warned,
as Mrs. Driscoll had done in the 1930s, that much besides knowledge of
the mathematics of a cryptosystem was needed to enter it. And, they
said, sharing the high-level problems would be wasteful. It would be
better to create more super-grade analyst positions within the Agency.

(3S//STTThe protests did not work! Baker and his panel were determined
to establish an outside center. Armed with a presidential signature,
Baker made sure that NSA set one up. With amazing speed, funds were
allocated, a site was selected, and a cover name was created. Before the
end of 1958, NSA had its think tank, one directly connected to the world
of the sometimesimpractical academics. Within the Agency it was known as
The Cryptanalytic Research Division of the Institute for Defense
Analysis at Princeton University. Outsiders thought it was a
communications research center within the Institute.123

\(U) Dr. Baker\'s Ha{f-an-Institute

(TS//SI) The Institute for Defense Analysis was founded in 1956 as a
means of creating a

direct link between academics and the military. MIT, Stanford, and other
research universities cooperated to set up the IDA for the exclusive
purpose of serving the needs of the Department of Defense. Princeton,
with its beautiful site, the Institute for Advanced Studies, and its
proximity to Bell Laboratories, seemed the ideal \"campus\" setting. NSA
agreed! But agreeing to establish the new institute was something
different from doing all that the Baker panel had recommended.

ffO//OI) The Agency was able to quietly avoid following many of the
threatening recommendations. Only six NSA mathematicians were allowed in
the new center because the Agency was determined to keep its own group
working on the highlevel problems.

GIS//0I) In addition, the Institute\'s mandate was unilaterally shifted
to abstract research and to anticipating future systems, rather than
\"attacking solely current problems.\" Although its founders were told
they would be responsible for advanced work on computer designs and
software, there was no intention of taking all such responsibilities
away from NSA\'s various research groups.124

(Tfi//SftAnd the work at the CRD got off to a slow start. It took some
time to obtain rooms and then a separate building. More difficult was
gathering a team of leading mathematicians willing to devote part of
their academic careers to cryptanalytic problems. Running the old summer
institute at Princeton helped attract some academics, but in its first
years, 1959-1963, the CRD found it difficult to keep even its directors.
Some great mathematicians served in that post, such as J. Barkley Rosser
and A Adrain Albert, but they did not stay on

125

(TS//0I) But the main reason for the CRD\'s slow start was the Agency\'s
decision to try to keep the Princeton group busy on abstract problems.





Materials on real targets were kept from the CRD\'s staff for several
years.126

£ES//fli) The quiet changes to the Baker panel\'s recommendations about
IDA were not the only ways the Agency defended itself during the late
1950s. Lightning, for example, was not canceled nor was Redman. More
indicative ofthe power ofthe Agency was the reappearance ofthe Harvest
project. After some rather sharp conflicts within NSA in spring 1958
millions were committed to building IBM\'s version of an NSA computer.

\(U) A Harvest ofOverexpectations

OS//SI) After a year of super-secret design work in its version of an
ERA the Mohansic Laboratories,117 IBM returned to NSA in May 1957 with
its design proposal for Harvest. Soon, there was a successful request
for more Agency financing to develop the mass storage tape system,
Tractor. But a formal agreement to begin Harvest had to wait another
year, and the major financial commitment to it was delayed yet another
half year. The delays were caused by more than quibbling over technical
and financial details. There were substantive objections to IBM\'s
design and procedures.128

(3\$) The objections were voiced as early as 1957 when it became clear
that IBM had decided that the heart ofthe NSA system was to be Stretch,
the computer that had evolved into a super-speed number cruncher for
customers such as the AEC. The proposed NSA Harvest computer was not
going to follow the architectural specifications of Farmer.129 The first
\"special\" part ofthe proposed Harvest system was not going to be one
of many \"boxes\" that would hook onto adatabus, but an expanded version
of Abner\'s Streaming unit that was hardwired into the Stretch.13\"

(\#fThe in-house NSA R&D evaluation group was not put off by the
complaints nor by the devi

ations from the original Farmer ideas, however. They chose to ignore
some mumbling against the Stretch component because they were so
impressed with IBM\'s specifications. When the R&D group used the paper
specifications IBM supplied to estimate Harvest\'s power, they were
quite pleased. They calculated that major data processing tasks, such as
mass sorting, would be 100 to 200 times faster than on their most
trusted machine, the IBM 705. When IBM promised that it could build the
Tractor mass memory system, it seemed sure that Harvest would be as much
as five or ten years ahead of what the commercial computer market was
producing. NSA it appeared, was to have its super data-processing
machine.131

(S\^ Tractor was appealing. Its design hinted that the Agency might have
one great memory that would allow the use of advanced data management
tools. Tractor\'s \"data rate\" was to be 100 times that ofthe best
magnetic tape systems of the day. As important, it was to hold an
enormous amount of information, so much so that it held out the promise
of being able to automatically locate and deliver the backlogs of
messages needed for \"depth\" searching. Each Tractor tape held the
equivalent of eighty standard ones, and the system had 480 of them.
Tractor would automate access to the equivalent of 39,ooo regular tapes,
perhaps enough to store all the Soviet mes

sages

132

l&) Despite the encouraging news about Tractor, opposition to Harvest
reemerged in late 1957. One reason for the new protests was the feeling
that Harvest might undermine lightning, but much was caused by dislike
ofthe close relationship between IBM and the Agency.133

(-81 While NSA\'s Harvest team worked on the various contract proposals
IBM submitted, Howard Engstrom became a major and vocal critic. He made
his position quite clear, even in the director\'s office.





(•€•) As head ofNSA research, then as the Agency\'s deputy director,
Engstrom was informed of the technical details of Harvest and IBM\'s
contractual demands. He was not happy with either. He and others felt
that IBM\'s technology was not really that far ahead of other vendors.
He thought TBM had a lock on Agency business, and he was very upset by
IBM\'s insistence that the Agency treat much of Harvest as \"company
confidential\" information. As important to understanding his opposition
to Harvest, he felt that the enormous cost of the Harvest would cripple
other programs, including his creation, Freehand.134

QS) Engstrom wanted an end to the Harvest program or, at least, the
negotiation of better terms. He took his views to the director\'s
office, countering the pro-IBM arguments of the Agency\'s Harvest team.
Engstrom was forceful, but the director knew NSA had already invested
too much in Harvest to allow a real showdown. Lieutenant General Samford
certainly did not want to be blamed for slowing the delivery of the
AEC\'s machine by forcing IBM to reconfigure Harvest.135

££) IBM and the Agency regulars won the day. Engstrom was overruled. And
the Agency gave in on many Harvest contractual issues. IBM\'s refusal to
provide rent-free equipment and to forego charges for other typically
\"free\" items was accepted. Few penalties for late delivery were
demanded.

(f£) A final and very large contract was signed on 15 June 1959. The
Agency had already invested \$1,987,000 in IBM-conducted research and
design studies; now it committed itself to an additional \$11,400,000
for the Stretch computer, the Harvest \"bump\" and the Tractor tape
system. Soon it added another \$3,000,000 for additional high-speed
memories.136

(P3 That was not all, however. Within six months IBM returned to the
Agency with the

news that the corporation had underestimated the cost of the Harvest and
Tractor components by approximately one hundred percent, or
\$5,500,000.137 Then the Agency was informed that delivery would be
postponed indefinitely. In addition, the Agency was told that many
factors had led IBM to some \"moderate degradation of some parts of the
system hardware.\"

(£\# The Agency was in too deep; there was little it could do. To
withdraw from Harvest would cause another Nomad embarrassment. But the
Agency took steps to protect itself; it negotiated a ceiling price for
the Harvest component: The government was to pay no more than
\$9,300,000 for it.

02\) Then an unexpected expense had to be accepted. NSA would be one of
the first to realize that Pendergrass had not been quite on the mark in
the mid-1940s when he described the future of digital computing. He and
everyone else had underestimated the difficulties and expense of
programming. As computers increased in power and as users expected more
from them, software development was taking as much or more time than
hardware construction, and it was on a path that was making it as costly
as the machines. Basic Harvest software, the Agency soon learned, was to
cost more than the original price of Stretch.138

0?) Because IBM had not promised to supply much software, just what it
had developed for and with the AEC group, NSA had to find the monies to
create a powerful operating system and an applications programming
language that would make the two types of computers in Harvest easy to
use. Those were big chores in the late 1950s. The Agency spent more than
\$4,000,000 on the initial software for Harvest.139

(£) It took several years to develop the applications language,
Transcrypt Qater called Alpha), the HAP assembly program for expert
programmers, and the operating system, HOPS. Pushed to





have them ready for the Harvest machine\'s delivery to NSA they, and the
first applications, programs, were skeletons to be filled in over
time.140

\(G) The software was impressive, however. HOPS was one of the first
sophisticated operating systems. Alpha was also ahead of its time. And
the routines that gave easy access to the data in Tractor were
innovative.

\(38) But the clever NSA software designers could not achieve one valued
and expected goal for Harvest, multiprogramming. Harvest was unable to
run more than one program at a time. Other frustrations arose when it
was realized that Stretch could not run while the \"bump\" was in
operation and that programming for the \"bump\" could not be turned over
to nonspecialists.141

\%¥S) While the software project was being organized, Harvest\'s critics
intensified their protests. Howard Engstrom and SAB members continued to
be worried about IBM\'s ability to produce a functioning machine, but
they were more upset by IBM\'s power to convince the Agency to allow the
company to go its own way while it was working onNSA\'s problems. The
stipulation that NSA approve the design changes was not always, perhaps
rarely, followed. The Agency critics wondered if NSA would get an NSA
computer, or one that suited the needs of IBM.142

£FS) The Harvest situation reached a crisis point in i960. Since
Harvest\'s beginnings, the SAB had been concerned that IBM would not
follow its request to make Harvest, the special architecture Farmer
computer. When the cost overrun and contractual problems aggravated an
already tense relationship between the board and the operating
cryptanalysts, when SAB was informed that Harvest\'s software would be
sparse, and when it was told that the machine might have to be only a
stopgap \"transition to Lightning,\" the SAB became suspicious. When it
learned of the

details of IBM\'s program management, SAB decided to review the
project.143

Q£Sj One source of SAB\'s concern may have been a young Agency engineer
assigned to watch over Harvest\'s development in New York. He endangered
his career by writing to the Agency in March 1959:U4

\"The situation here is now in a bit of an enigma. On the one hand the
agency would like to make absolutely sure that the equipment which it
requested will 1) accomplish the job desired, 2) work at the speed
indicated, 3) make the most efficient use of components, 4) be as
reliable as possible, 5) cost as little as possible, and 6) be delivered
on the date indicated.

\"On the other hand IBM desires chiefly that only item 6 and possibly
item 5 be satisfied. Only as long as items 1,2,3, and 4 are consistent
with these goals they \[sic\] will be considered.

\"To guarantee any of items 1,2, 3,4 or 5, the agency must evaluate the
design prior to construction. IBM cannot furnish information for this
purpose. They cannot because their delivery date is predicated on
designing while constructing

\"IBM has so scheduled things and has kept its cards so close to its
chest that it will be impossible to stem the tide. Any design evaluation
will cause delay. Delay will cost the agency money and computing time
out of all proportion to the savings. This is chiefly because the IBM
machinery is going too fast to stop\.... As usual the agency has a firm
hold on the IBM leash and is being dragged down the street. It is this
reporters \[sic\] view that if you want to control an R/D contract you
should pick a company other than IBM. If you pick IBM sit back and wait
to get something like the equipment you ordered at a premium price.
Don\'t try to direct, you\'re only kidding yourself if you do.\"




tSJ The Scientific Advisory Board demanded an accounting. They created a
special committee in i960. The Harvest program was so important that the
\"greats\" of American cryptanalysis, Joseph Wenger and William F.
Friedman, were asked to head that blue ribbon panel.143 Their selection
reflects a search for balance. Wenger was noted for his sponsorship of
\"science\" within the Agency; Friedman was the illustrious advocate
ofin-house cryptanalytic work. Although they had different perspectives,
they agreed that Harvest was far short of expectations.\*\*6

(SO The Wenger-Friedman report endangered NSA\'s research/development
efforts. The report might not lead to Harvest\'s cancellation, but it
could make additional large-scale projects unlikely. Samuel S. Snyder,
who had been in charge of the Agency\'s Harvest group, was put in the
uncomfortable position of having to rush to the defense of the machine
and IBM. He met with the two \"greats\" and assured them of Harvest\'s
potential to be a Farmer-architecture machine. He then insisted that IBM
had done an adequate job of ensuring that Harvest would be reliable.
Snyder cited the many internal error-checking systems in the machine and
the effort that had gone into the quality control system for components.

\(U) Snyder then asked the panel to reconsider its conclusion about the
difference between initial promises of Harvest\'s speed and what was
being reported in the late 1950s. He asked them to realize that until
there had been enough time to develop sophisticated software, Harvest
could not measure up to its true potential.147

\(U) It was Snyder\'s persuasiveness, combined with the fact that the
Agency had already invested too much to abandon IBM that led to a
continuation of the existing Harvest program. There was another reason.
In the context of the expenditures on the Cold War, Harvest\'s price was
minute.

(TS//SI) The radar early-warning computers IBM was building had a near
\$1,000,000,000 budget. A single B-52 bomber cost as much as the Stretch
component of Harvest, and hundreds of them were being built.148 Even the
new NSA electronic communications systems, including CRITTCOM to inform
the president in emergency situations, were minor investments compared
to the billions poured into the missile and space programs of the
era.149

GTS//ST) But there was something else that few knew about that may have
allowed the Agency to go its own way and continue with Lightning,
Harvest, and in-house work on the high-level Soviet problem. Something
cloaked in the greatest secrecy was going on in the Agency. A hope with
the name \"Hairline\" was shifting power back into the hands of the
\"insiders.\"

\(U) ERA\'s and the Shop-floor Cryppies\' Revenge

(TS//SI) While SAB considered the merits of the high-tech and
high-science aspects of Harvest and Freehand, Jack Holtwick was lobbying
for \$17,000,000 to purchase stock computers for the extension of the
ongoing attack on the Soviet problem; five years of dogged work by NSA
and British shop-floor cryptanalysts blossomed into what appeared to be
a major coup.150 In late 1956 the Agency \"insiders\" seemed vindicated.

(TS//SI) By early 1957 the existence of two significant \"bust\"
conditionsf

\]naoH)een confirmed. There was a belief that

their exploitation would yield much information and lead to a pure
solution. Then the rest of the machines would be penetrated.

(TS//SI) Immediately an in-house oversight group was formed: Ray Bowman,
Leo Lathrom, and Marge Haworth took charge. Then Dale Marston was asked
to establish the managerial framework for a machine and processing
complex for Hairline. Few others, especially outsiders,


PL 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)



P,L 86-36 E0.3.3(h)(2)

were told of Hairline. It was a secret within a secret.

(T8//SI) While the Freehand and Harvest projects waited, Hairline took
off. Designers were set to work on six new and advanced special-purpose
machines. They had to be advanced. Just one of the searches for the bust
conditions called for 638,073495557,089,200 tests.151 By mid1957 three
designs were ready. The machines were architecturally innovative. They
had to be. Because the Hairline machines were needed immediately, they
had to use existing technologies, slow ones. To compensate, the
designers made imaginative uses of parallelism and multiple memories.
Even analog circuits were employed to generate ultra-high-speed
processing from old technologies.132

GES//SB The group turned to IBM to take over some of the detailing.
There were thoughts of having IBM build all the Hairline machines. But
as Hairline grew in size and importance, consultants from other
companies were called in. John Howard, then an executive with Burroughs,
helped, as did engineers from Sperry-Rand and Magnavox.153 Then, when
the original plan to have IBM construct the entire series of machines
was dropped, the other firms were asked to do more than give technical
advice.154

(T0//0I) By 1958 it seemed that the NSA was about to reenter the world
of heroic cryptanalysis. The Agency and its crew needed such a belief
because NSA failed to predict the launch of Sputnik in October. That
Russian satellite, the world\'s first, did more than embarrass
America\'s Big Science establishment. Sputnik proved that the Soviet
Union could launch massively destructive missiles against the United
States. America required high-level intelligence more than ever, and it
needed it instantly.

(TS//S1) Perhaps that is why the November request to the Department of
Defense for a special allocation of \$20,000,000 for the first three

years of the Hairline machine program received a quick and positive
response. Told that \"recent technical successes have resulted in the
cryptarialytic reconstruction of a

machine cipher,\" which will make it \"possible to read approximately
11,000,000 words per month,\" the Department of Defense could not
resist. When it was informed that the CIA had agreed to help in the
work, the project was even more attractive.155

(TS//8\*j Hairline had to be made operational immediately. Luckily, NSA
found a devoted industrial ally to help do that.156 In a sense, it was a
very old one, although it was a start-up company. Nineteen fifty-seven
saw the rebirth of an \"ERA\" in St. Paul. One of the ex- \"G\" officers
who had stayed on at the Minnesota plant after Remington-Rand bought
ERA, William C. Norris, led a large contingent of frustrated engineers
out of Sperry-Rand. They formed the Control Data Corporation. CDC was
small but innovative and filled with men who had worked on military,
even OP-20-G projects. They knew what cryptanalysts needed and how to
conduct secret projects.

(T0//0B The CDC group had been frustrated by the poor cousin treatment
they had received from Sperry-Rand. Brilliant engineers like Seymour
Cray had not been allowed to turn their advanced ideas into products.
Unknown to IBM, they had developed, on a slim budget, a super-fast and
rugged circuit design they wanted to use as the heart of a
supercomputer. The circuit ran at 2.5 megahertz, a speed IBM was trying
to attain through massive expenditures. Soon the CDC circuits ran at 10
meg.

(TS//SE) That circuit impressed the engineers at NSA who had been trying
out an advanced twist on Farmer since the mid-1950s. The goal of their
farsighted Dervish project was to create sets of functional circuits,
each to be built using the latest miniaturized components. With the
circuits being compatible, it was hoped that entire SPDs could be
\"assembled\" rather than handwired.





That would allow NSA\'s own engineers to build Farmer machines in-house
and to do so within months, not years. The Agency engineers achieved
their goal in the 1960s. Using the CDC circuit as a model, they created
their CADY cards and were able to build twenty-one very effective SPDs
with them during the 1960s.157

(TS/ySi) CDC\'s contributions went far, far beyond CADY. The computers
they had in mind, what became the CDC 1604 and its grander follow-ons of
the early 1960s, the 3000 and 6000 series, used very sophisticated
architectural ideas. They led the company to become the world\'s leading
supercomputer manufacturer of the 1960s and 1970s. Its smaller 160 also
cut a path into what became the minicomputer market.

(S.) CDC\'s achievements angered Tom Watson. How could a handful of
engineers \"and a janitor,\" he asked, be able to accomplish what IBM\'s
teams of hundreds could not achieve? He may have been angered by
something else: CDC became a favorite of the science-oriented men at NSA
and a long-term partner of its special-purpose machine group, one which
demanded and financed the development and use of cutting-edge technology
and advanced architecture.158

(T3//3I) As in the days of ERA, CDC had its secret rooms where the
world\'s most advanced computer work was done by engineers with the
highest security clearances. The intimate NSA relationship with CDC
lasted unbroken for a decade.

£¥&) While it would supply NSA with its number-crunching supercomputers
of the 1960s, the Hairline project was at the center of CDC\'s 1960s
crypto-machine work. Some of the machines it created for the Soviet
attack were works of engineering art. Welcher, Coiner, Pullman, Coleman,
and Rudolph cost millions of dollars, but were worth it in terms of
cryptanalytic power. Although some cost as much as one half

the as

e price of IBM\'s Stretch, they were twenty times powerful.159

(¥8) Using one of CDC\'s super-fast generalpurpose computers, such as
the 1604 or 3600, as the control and I/O for the special-purpose
components, the Hairline machines remained in use and competitive with
the latest commercial machines for more than a decade. NSA never got its
modern Farmer, which could easily link any number of special-purpose
machines, but the CDC creations came close.

(TS//SI) As important for the Agency, CDC\'s projects went smoothly. The
company seemed as devoted to the Agency as to its commercial interests.
It always kept the Agency informed of its progress, and it delivered
machines on time.

(T9//3I) But the other major computer companies played an early and
important role in Hairline. The first of the I

\^computers, the \$900,000 Blueplate, was shipped from Sperry-Rand\'s
(previously Remington-Rand\'s) St. Paul factory to the Agency in October
1958. l6°

(TS//SI) Other machines followed. SperryRand, CDC, and Burroughs built
huge Hairline SPDS. One early Hairlihe machine, Haviland, cost almost
\$io,ooo,oooi It and its sisters rivaled the supercomputers of the time
in complexity and power and outpaced the best commercial computers of
the 1960s and 1970s by factors of 1000.

161

(TS//SI) IBM was asked to rejoin the specialpurpose machine effort. \\
In 1968 it delivered its impressive Aztek. Although only two-thirds the
size of a Sperry-Rand SJD of 1965, its price tag reflected its power.
Itw\|as the attempt to put Lightning\'s research to\|use. l62 Its high
price brought great returns. Aztek did its particular job 2,400 times
faster than IBM\'s commercial super

computer of the Stretch.163

era,

the 7030 offshoot of

PL. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)





\(U) Technology and Faith, 1962

(■6} While Hairline was receiving its first set of machines, IBM
delivered Harvest to NSA in February 1962 after its engineers overcame
an unexpected and major problem. The critical special core memory for
the machine had proven unworkable, and the Harvest project had almost
come to a halt in mid-1960. It had taken additional millions and much
creativity to find a substitute that could reach the speed IBM had
promised.164

(TS//SI) Harvest\'s arrival meant that the mid-1950s faith in a
technological solution could be tested. That faith had put the Agency\'s
reputation on the line. NSA had convinced the government to invest more
than \$100,000,000 in special equipment and research to conquer the
Soviet enciphering machines. That was twenty-five times what the World
War II Bombes had cost. On top of those special investments, NSA had
spent additional tens of millions of dollars on commercial computers.
That included a copy of the startling CDC 1604 for IDA\'s mathematical
explorations.

(TS//SI) More was going on. The IDA was beginning to lobby for access to
real problems, and Britain was putting its Freehand machine to work
against the Soviet ciphers. But no one was sure that the faith in
technology and science would be sustained. Harvest\'s software had not
had a chance to show its stuff, and Tractor had \"bugs.\" Harvest\'s
backers still had to prove that it would be the fastest and most
powerful computer in the world.165 The research portions of
Freehand-Lightning showed promise, but also that some technological
limits had been reached. Cryotrons proved stubborn, and thin-film
technology, though still viable, was facing constraints. The IDA had not
yet worked a methodological

::: {style="width: 45.254901960784316%;"}
:::

\(U) Harvest

miracle and was just beginning to show how supercomputers could be
integrated into day-today cryptanalysis.

(T0//0I) The Hairline system was yet to provide much. It was generating
only a small percent of the traffic

J While valuable, Silver\'s messages

contained rather low-level information.

(T0//SI) There were some clear triumphs, however. NSA had continued its
codebreaking victories over the codes and ciphers of nations other than
those in the Communist bloc, reading at least of the world\'s systems.
And the

Agency seemed to be creating valuable information on the Soviets through
T/A, plain language, and ELIOT.

PL 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)





mftm But the high-level problem remained unsolved. The huge investments
in Freehand, Hairline and Harvest had, as yet, failed to bring NSA into
a new age of heroic cryptanalysis. Some results were badly needed if
faith and investments in science and technology were to be maintained.

\(U) Notes

1\. (U) Thomas Johnson\'s American Cryptology during the Cold War,
1945-1989 contains a valuable review of the numerous reviews and
investigations of the Agency.

2\. (T3//9r) Thomas Johnson\'s work is informative and (SS) NSA APIA ACC
28690, \"NSA SAB Members and Minutes,\" 27 April 1954, is very useful.

3-(U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Trish Gallagher, \"Glimpse of a Man; The life
of Ralph J. Canine.\"

4\. ffSJ NSA CCH Series XIIZ, DoD, Report of the Secretary\'s Ad Hoc
Committee on COMINT/COMSEC, June 1958. (Robertson Report) The Robertson
Report is housed in CCH Series VTX1.6.

5.flFS\#SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, list of
Computers,\" nd. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,BSA, \"MPRO Tehnical
Reports,\" circa 1956.

6.fTS//61) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd.

7\. (S) NSA Technical literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964. The name Bogart was
selected because it was the name of a well-known newspaper editor.

8.(84 NSA Technical literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964.

9.(Q NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. Campaigns \"Aristocrat: An Intelligence
Test for Computers.\"

10\. (TO//0I) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, ADVA-13 \'The HEXT 13ABS Diarization
Program,\" 23 May i960. £») NSA CCH Series XIIZ, ADVA-13 Tech. Rpt,
\"The DevTon-Pahala-Wyoming Mechanized Data Handling Complex,\" 23 May
i960. (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, MPRO-11, \"Reading Manual Morse
oni3ABS

Transmission Via Digital Computer, 16 December i960.

11\. (S) NSA Technical literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electivnic Digital Computers, 1964.

12\. (SfNSA CCH Series XII Z, SCAG Meeting of 6 December 1951.

13\. (WNSA AHA ACC 28690, \"Members of NSA Science, Electronic, and
Mathematics Panels,\" circa 1953. £\$}- NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
\"Historical Study-Iightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963. (O-NSA AHA ACC
28690, \"NSASAB Members,\" April 1955

14\. (TS//SI) NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full-Scale Attack
on Russian High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956.

15\. (¥&) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Diary of Samuel S.Snyder, 29
October 1957.

16\. (U) Canine had tried to build an SPD construction branch within the
Agency that was large enough to do all of its own work, but Congress
favored a system of contracting out to commercial manufacturers.

17\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT,
Phase III: Third Addition,\" 1 November 1956.

18\. (U) Thomas Johnson\'s American Cryptology during the Cold War,
1945-1989 covers these points.

19\. fm NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSASAB Members and Minutes,\" 27 April 1954.

20\. (U) The Hoover and Killian recommendations were, to a very great
extent, affirmed in a third mid1950s review of NSA by William H.
Jackson, who was \"keeping an eye on the Agency\" for President
Eisenhower. See Thomas Johnson\'s American Cryptology during the Cold
War, 1945-1989.

21\. (U) He had financed the successor to Howard Aiken\'s 1930s
supercomputer in the mid-i940s. But that machine proved something of an
embarrassment. His SSEC of 1948 had too many technological compromises
and was soon regarded as a dinosaur. This experience may have led him to
be wary of \"machines before their time.\" Charles J. Bashe et al.,
IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 52.

22\. (U) Charles J. Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 132.





PL. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)

23\. 48) NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 45

24\. (U) What is not explained in the documentation is why, after
rejecting the UNIVAC machine in the late 1940s because it used
\"decimal\" representation, the 702 was so well received at the Agency.

25\. (T&) The NSA group knew of the TPM and found it attractive. When
considering whether or not to acquire a 701, they were informed that the
TPM development was lagging behind, and its production version (702)
faced an indefinite birth date. (3\$) NSA CCH Series XII Z, folder
marked \"Machine Reports 1951-1952.\" The 702 had an interesting
feature, a bus architecture. With the bus acting as a transmission line,
many separate units (ALUS) could be attached to the machine. Charles J.
Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986),
173. This architectural idea paralleled the \"Farmer\" concept that was
developing within the Agency.

26\. (Z&r NSA CCH Series XII Z, folder marked, \"Machine Reports
1951-1952.\"

27\. (Sj NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964. (S) NSA CCH Series
XIK Box 8, Snyder \"Yearly Cost of Representative NSA Machines,\" May
1955.

28\. VS) NSA CCH XIH, Box 12, NSA GeneralPurpose Computers, a list
compiled by Samuel S. Snyder.

29\. (IS) NSA CCH Series XII X-MPRO, U.S. Cryptanalytic Research and
Development Committee, \"Joint Long Term Program for Research and
Development in the Field of Cryptanalytic Equipment,\" 21 July 1948.
{TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel
Meetings.\" (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Communications
Supplementary Activities, RAMP Report II,\" 21 December 1948.\" (S\#69
NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.
Snyder, 24 February 1982. CES//M) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Joint Long
Term Program (Old Planning Material, 1948-1949)\" compiled by Doug
Hogan.

30\. (-9//9I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24

February 1982. T\^Si. NSA AHA ACC10842, Ray L. Bowman, \"Engineering
Diary,\" circa 1945-1950. Bowman\'s own ideas may have been reinforced
after

he learned of the

machine which,

apparently, had an architecture quite like that advocated under the
Farmer program. f9)-NSA CCH Series XIIZ,GCHQ, \"List of Non-Hollerith X
Department Machine Descriptions,\" 12 January 1953.

31\. &} NSA CCH Series XII Z,Ray Bowman, \"Farmer,\" 5 April 1954.
P&rt&i) (NOFORN) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"BSA SAB Minutes,\" April 1954. The
project began in mid-1954

32\. (U) Especially enlightening are (¥fi//9f) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Report of Special Study Group on Analytic Requirements for
Farmer-Nomad,\" 15 November 1954. (€\> NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"NSA SAB
Subpanel on General Purpose Analytic Equipment,\" 7 March 1955. (T6//6I)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT, Phase III:
Third Addition,\" 1 November 1956. (Sf NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"Farmer,\"
S.Snyder 25August 1955. 08J NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"HARVEST as the
Control Unit of the Farmer System.\" A fundamental difference between
the typical computer and what NSA\'s men envisioned was its data flow.
Most users had one data stream, but much of NSA\'s cryptanalytic work
depended upon two streams. The old collator had proven so useful because
it handled two flows, and the Abner streaming unit imitated many aspects
of the collator.

33- (W) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May

1953\. and various years. Dervish eventually led to the Cady building
block components (which stemmed from the CDC work). On Bowman\'s plans.
{8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ray Bowman, \"Farmer,\" 5 April

1954\. ■(\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General Plan for Farmer Program.\"

34\. £T0//9f) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Report of Special Study Group on
Analytic Requirements for Farmer-Nomad,\" 15 November 1954.

35- (?S) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Diaries of Samuel S.Snyder,
April 1954.

36\. (8) NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History ofNSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 73.





37- fl»J NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Diaries of Samuel S.Snyder,
April 1955.

38\. C8) NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No, 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 20.

39\. OS}- NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of
NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 21.

40\. 46) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA SAB Members,\" April 1955. PM//3Q
(NQPORN) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"BSA SAB Minutes,\" April 1954.

41\. (U) Charles J. Bashe et al., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 418.

42\. (U) The project began in mid-1954- NSA CCH Series XIK, S.Snyder,
Diaries of Samuel S.Snyder, 2 March 1955 and 5 May 1955- (T8//SI//NP)
NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"BSA SAB Minutes,\" April 1954.

43\. tm NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S. Snyder Diaries, 3 March
1955.

44\. (U) Charles J. Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 418, 424.

45- (U) James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary of Data Processing
Technology (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987), 246,108.

46\. (C) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 5.

47\. (8) KuOback wrote a long report outlining the critical processing
needs at the Agency. \$8) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. Kullback, \"The
Increasing Complexity of the Analytic Equipment Program,\" 12 October
1955.

48\. tf») NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S. Snyder Diaries, 19
March 1955.

49\. (3S) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S. Snyder Diaries, May
1955.

50\. £\$) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S.Snyder Diaries, 30 May
1955 and 22August 1955.

51.4G) NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, The Harvest Story,\" 7.

52\. (¥S) NSA CCH Series XIK, S.Snyder, Samuel S.Snyder Diaries, 22July
1955.

53- (\#» NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. Kullback, \'The Increasing Complexity
of the Analytic Equipment Program,\" 12 October 1955.

54\. &ffm NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral HistoryInterview OH04-82 with Samuel
S.Snyder, 24

February 1982. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr. Joseph Blum,
\"Harvest Software,\" 19 June 1981. A useful article on Harvest is NSA
CCH Series XI K, (U) Edward K. Yasaki, \"Fastest in Its Time,\"
(Stretch), Datamation, 28 (January 1982): 34-43

55- 6Wj) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S.Snyder Diaries, August
and September 1955. (6} NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest
Story,\" 8.

56\. (& NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, \'The Harvest Story,\" 10. On
views of the \"harvest\" system, (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview
with Dr. Joseph Blum, \"Harvest Software,\" 19 June 1981.

57- (U) NSA CCH XIK Box 5 Samuel S. Snyder, folder, \"Program
Descriptions.\"

58\. (U) George Cramer had been a navy mathematician, however.

59- (U) NSA CCH Personality File. (C) NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder,
\"The Harvest Story,\" 12.

60\. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 432.

61\. (TS} NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S.Snyder Diaries iMay 56.
Kullback believed his directive to make it an Agency machine, rather
than one to fit the commercial market, would be followed.

62\. &ff   NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH04-82 with
Samuel S.Snyder, 24 February, 1982, 174.

63\. Wf&) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH04-82 with
Samuel S.Snyder, 24 February 1982, 183. (TS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Notes on Farmer.\" (e) NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest
Story,\" ise.

64\. W NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Farmer Plantation Definition and
Objectives,\" 15 November 1956. At the same time that Tractor was being
designed, the Agencywas exploring the other mass memory devices of the
era. Predating its acquisitions of automated microfilm and video mass
memory systems, the microfilm Mini and Magnacard options were examined
in the late 1950s. (\$ NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne, \"Research
at NSA,\" NSA Technical Journal (Spring 1968): i.m NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"The Origins and Development of the NSASAB,\" 1 June 1965.

65\. (WSS-NSA AHA ACC 36784, \"Data Storage and Retrieval Symposium,\"
16-17 April 1959.

TOP OCOnCTOGOMINTOnCL USA, AUG, CAM GBR AND NZL//XI



66\. f\$\* NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"HARVEST as the Control Unit of the
Farmer System.\" (9) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ray Bowman, \"Farmer,\" 5
April 1954.

67\. (S\#SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH04-82 with
Samuel S.Snyder, 24 February 1982,183. It is revealing to compare the
1955 Farmer outline by Samuel S.Snyder and the Harvest Report, m NSA CCH
Series XIIZ, \"Farmer,\" S. Snyder 25 August 1955. The comparison shows
that the Harvest group focused on a subset of the Farmer-recommended
cryptanalytic tasks, the \"scoring and testing\" group.

68\. (U) Note that later NSASAB panel reports, March 1955, did stress the
ability to work on two sets of data at the character level. However, the
report also emphasized the \"ancillary units.\"

69.tQ-NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 19.

70\. (J6) NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 19.

71\. m NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 28.

72\. tQ NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 30. (C)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Harvest Farmer Costs.\"

73\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr. Joseph Blum, \"Harvest
Software,\" 19 June 1981

74\. 4& NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Origins and Development of the
NSASAB,\" 1 June 1965. £ES} NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Abbreviated History
ofSCAG,\" February 1951-February 1952.

75\. (9) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Notes, Anne Brown Historical Study of
NSASAB.\" &&) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"Members of NSA Science, Electronic,
and Mathematics Panels,\" circa 1953. £9) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"The
Origins and Development of the NSASAB,\" 1 June 1965.

76\. m NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Notes, Anne Brown Historical Study of
NSASAB.\"

77\. t€f NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Some Recommendations for NSASAB
Activities,\" 6 April 1961. (£} NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Notes, Anne Brown
Historical Study of NSASAB.\" (€\> NSA AHA ACC 36784, \"Robertson
Report,\" 31 May 1957.

78\. (T9) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA SAB Members and Minutes,\" 27 April
1954. pFS//S4\^

(NOrORM) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"BSA SAB Minutes,\" April 1954. (•€•) NSA
AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA SAB Members,\" April 1955. (6) NSA AHA ACC 28690,
\"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\" October 1956. 0\#) NSA AHA ACC
28690, \"Members of NSA Science, Electronic, and Mathematics Panels,\"
circa 1953- P») NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963. 79- (U) NSA CCH Personality file.

80\. (¥8} NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel S, Snyder Diaries, 14
October 1857 shows other \"science types\" objected, as late as then, to
giving IBM the Harvest contract. One reason was that it seemed to be
turning Agency problems over to the corporation. Howard Engstrom pointed
out in August that Harvest was so large that it threatened to eliminate
many other projects in the Agency.

81\. \^ NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Notes, Anne Brown Historical Study of
NSASAB.\"

82\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr. Joseph Blum, \"Harvest
Software,\" 19 June 1981.

83\. WJJSA CCH Series XII Z, H. Campaigne, \"lightning.\"

84\. (\$} NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"SCAG Meeting of 6 December 1951.\" (T9)
NSA CCH Series XIII Z, \"Abbreviated History of SCAG,\" February
1951February 1952. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, Notes from \"First
Annual Review of Group A Resources,\" 1962. m) NSA AHA ACC 28690,
\"Members of NSA Science, Electronic, and Mathematics Panels,\" circa
1953- (T3//3I) NSA AHA ACC 36784, \"Data Storage and Retrieval
Symposium,\" 16-17 April 1959-f\*\*-) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
\"Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963.

85\. («) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"NSA SAB Subpanel on General-Purpose
Analytic Equipment,\" 7 March 1955. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,The
Accelerated Machine Program,\" 2 August 1955. fflV/Oq NSA CCH Series XII
Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT, Phase III -Third Addition,\" 1
November 1956.

86\. (U) \"Remarks at the Dedication of John von Neumann Hall,\" NSA
Technical Journal, VI (Winter 1961): i.£HB) NSA AHA ACC 42444, \"Baker
Panel: IDA established,\" 21 February 1958. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, \"Mechanization in Support of





COMINT, Phase III -Third Addition,\" lNovember 1956.

87\. (TS//SI) NSAAHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack
on Russian High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956.

88\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Lightning Research,\" nd.

89\. (€} Holtwick\'s recommendation for the inhouse initiative was
oriented to a rather traditional search for a pure solution that
included a subsidy of several million dollars for a computer for GC&CS.
The machinery he asked for indicates that the Agencywanted a general
solution and did not think the few busts they had found would ever
provide valuable intelligence. For NSA he requested two 704s, three
705s, one Sled II, sixteen Audicos to convert incoming signals, eight
Bogarts for editing, one special \"Epicure,\" two high-speed Dervish
machines, ninety small data conversion devices. t+0//iD NSA AHA ACC
46406, \"Recommendation for a Full-Scale Attack on Russian High Level
Systems,\" 2 May 1956.

90\. (8) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\"
October 1956.

91\. {8) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\"
October 1956. NSA\'s \"insiders,\" of course, had a role in formulating
Freehand. OP-20-G\'s Jack Holtwick was central to the project. (SSt\^WT
NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full-Scale Attack on Russian
High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
MPRO03/4, \"The Hairline Complex: Part 7, Coiner,\" Prepared by Richard
W. Ader, 1 May i960.

92\. (■¥&) NSA AHA ACC 42444, \"Lightning Program,\" 4 August 1958.

93\. (T0//S\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Lightning Research,\" nd. Project
Lightning gained their and the president\'s approval in early 1958 and
in late 1957 Canine could state that the secretary of defense had
already agreed to the proposals in principle. fS) NSA AHA ACC 28690,
\"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\" October 1956.

94- (T3//3I) NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack
on Russian High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956 shows how much the in-house
group counted on the high-speed machine

and how all of Freehand was shaped by the Soviet problem.

95- PPS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963. On the details of the request for the
in-house capability, see Holtwick, (T3//9I-) NSA AHA ACC 46406,
\"Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian High Level
Systems,\" 2 May 1956. He asked for some \$17,000,000 in new computers,
mainly to search for busts. He asked for 900 new workers. The list of
computers Holtwick desired included many needed just to turn the complex
intercepts of Soviet machines into forms useful in computer analysis.

Holtwick Requested:

2 704 or Atlas 2

3 705

1 Sled II 16 Audico 8 Bogart

1 Epicure

2 Dervish

90 Data Conversion (\$300 each)

96\. (Of- NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\"
October 1956. (TS//SI) NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full
Scale Attack on Russian High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956. (¥8) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,\" circa
1963. There was a difference between the Manhattan-Parallel proposal,
which was aimed specifically at the Soviet scrambler problem and the
board\'s plan for a mathematical research center. See (■¥&•) NSA AHA ACC
42444, \"Baker Panel: IDA established,\" 21 February 1958. O NSAAHA ACC
36784, \"Robertson Report,\" 31 May 1957

97-\^ NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\" October
1956.

98\. (8) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\"
October 1956.

99- \$\*- NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\"
October 1956.

100\. (ST) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\"
October 1956.

101\. £FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963. ■(IS}. NSA CCH Series XII Z, DoD,
Report of the





Secretary\'s Ad Hoc Committee on COMINT/COMSEC, June 1958. (Robertson
Report)

102\. (G) The office to centralize basic research, DARPA, was established
in February 1958. Even before then the services discouraged subdivisions
from subsidizing oftentimes-redundant investigations. The ONR\'s origins
are connected to such motives.

103\. (SS7W NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Lightning Research,\" nd. (TS//S1)
NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian
High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956.

104\. (T\^ffSt) NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full Scale
Attack on Russian High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956.

105\. {TS}- NSA AHA ACC 42444, \"Lightning Program,\" 4 August 1958.

106\. (T6//6I) NSA CCH Interview with Louis Tordella,

107\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"lightning Research,\" nd. Canine
was informed that the fiveyears project would not yield a \"1,000\"
machine, but he still aimed at major accomplishments, \"\...it is very
important that everyone realize that the ultimate goal is a
kilomegacycle computer, circuit limitations due to the speed of light
notwithstanding.\"

108\. (T6//6I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Lightning Research,\" nd.

109\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Lightning Research,\" nd., 19.

no. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"lightning Research,\" nd., 19. (S)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. Campaigne, \"Lightning,\" 54.

111\. {S} NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. Campaigne, \"Lightning.\" (U) Stan
Augarten, Bit by Bit: An Illustrated History of Computers (New York:
Ticknoir and Fields, 1984), 259.

112\. fM) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963, 28.

113\. dm- NSA AHA ACC 42444, \"HAIRLINE,\" 1958, 6.

114\. £ES)\_Afew years before and shortly after Lightning began, the
Agency tried to combine cryotrons with the need for an \"associative\"
memory, one that did not use formal addresses and that could test for
near as well as exact matches. The projects at A. D.

Little and General Electric were not operational successes. {¥S) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"General and Special-Purpose Computers: A Historical Look
and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986. (Hogan)

115\. t\$ NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. Campaigne, \"Lightning.\"

116\. (U) Charles J. Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 457. Points out that the Agency later supported very
advanced thin film work at Texas Instruments.

117\. (¥9//SIfr Leroy Wheadey \"Content Addressed Memories,\" NSA
Technical Journal IX (Winter 1964): 63. -m NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The
Origins and Development of the NSASAB,\" lJune 1965.

118.-\^NSA AHA ACC 36787. \"A Summary of NSA Response to Recommendations
of the 1957 Mathematics Panel Report,\" 18 February i960, 119. 1fi) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,\"The Origins and Development of the NSASAB,\" Uune
1965. pF8)-NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963. %S&f NSA CCH Series XIK, S.Snyder,
Samuel S.Snyder Diaries, 28 October 1957.

120\. ff9) NSA CCH Series XIK, S.Snyder, Samuel S. Snyder Diaries, 26
October 1957.

121\. \$} NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"EDP Panel Minutes,\" September
1959-September 1965.

122\. («•) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963.

123\. (\$ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Cryptalogic Milestones on, NSA-IDA,
SIGINT Communications Systems, ACRP. (TS Laconic) \"A History of
IDA-CRD,\" by Richard Leibler.

124\. (•¥§} NSA AHA ACC 42444, \"Lightning and Hairline,\" 21 February
1958. The CRD would develop one of the first advanced operating systems
for interactive computing. Its IDASYS was a result of its being the
first to obtain a CDC supercomputer and to having a very creative
programming expert as a visiting scholar.

125\. (TS Laconic) \"A History of IDA-CRD,\" by Richard Leibler. fl\^ NSA
AHA ACC 42444, \"Baker Panel: IDA established,\" 21 February 1958. GH5)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,\"
circa 1963. (85 NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Report of the NSASAB Committee on
Item 12,\"




PL 86-36 EG..3.3(h)(2)


4 February 1965. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, S. S. Snyder, \"Memorandum
for Dr. Kullback-Harvest,\" 30 November i960. For an insight into the
problems of the early years, 0) NSA AHA ACC 36787, \"A Summary of NSA
Response to Recommendations of the 1957 Mathematics Panel Report,\" 18
February i960. In a December 1994 interview with Richard A. Leibler at
the CCH, he stated that it was some years before the Agency agreed to
send any real problems to the Princeton group. It took a major
confrontation

or

before the Agency released any Soviet problems to the CRD.

126\. (U//FOUO) Interviews with Richard Liebler, at CCH, December 1994.

127\. (U) IBM also maintained the old site in Vestal, New York, which was
constructing advanced SPDs such as Sled Hand Parson IV. The relationship
of Vestal to Mohansic and why there were two NSA centers within the
corporation remained unexplained. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"Office
of Computers, List of Computers,\" nd. Also important is Vestal\'s use
of the Farmer approach of having building blocks of functional circuits
as the basis for its mid-1950s devices.

128\. (S\#8i) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

129\. (¥8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Notes on Farmer.\" (T0//3I) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"Lightning Research,\" nd.

130\. tS)- NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of
NSA General Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964.

131\. (U) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, Interview with Dr. Joseph Blum, \"Harvest
Software,\" 19 June 1981,10.

132\. (U) In the late 1950s the Agency was in the forefront of exploring
new database management ideas. See, for example, the NSA symposium held
in 1959, (TV/ST) NSA AHA ACC 36784, \"Data Storage and Retrieval
Symposium,\" 16-17 April 1959. On Tractor designs, {§}- NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers, 1964.

133- (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr. Joseph Blum, \"Harvest
Software,\" 19 June 1981, 14

134- (U) Engstrom left one meeting in protest when the IBM
representative declared that all that would be revealed would be
\"company confidential.\" Engstrom also argued against the major Harvest
contract in a meeting with the director, General Samford. Others had
similar feelings, (GJ NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest
Story,\" 36.

135-1& NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 32-3.

136\. (U) NSA AHA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Box 16, HARVEST Financial
Summary.

137\. (€)-NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,\" 33.

138\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr. Joseph Blum,\"Harvest
Software,\" 19 June 1981.

139\. NSA AHA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Box 16, Harvest Financial
Summary.

140\. £3)- NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,
Software.\"

141\. {€)-NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, \"The Harvest Story,
Software,\" 9. &} NSA CCH Series XIIZ, \"EDP Panel Minutes,\" September
1959-September 1965. fP9) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical
Study: Lightning-Freehand,\" circa 1963. dfSfWi NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"NSASAB Meeting,\" 19-20 May i960.

142\. (G) NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, \'The Harvest Story,\" 32.

143\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, S. S. Snyder, \"Memorandum for Dr.
Kullback-Harvest,\" 30 November i960. {&) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"EDP
Panel Minutes,\" September 1959-September 1965. (TD//0I) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, \"NSASAB Meeting,\" 19-20 May i960.

144\. p»\> AHA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, \"Harvest Memo,\" Donald M.
Rickerson to S. S. Snyder, 13 March 1959. (S//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

145- \<ft NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ware on NSASAB Mathematics Panel, 9
January 1967. fES\^ NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, \"Historical Study:
LightningFreehand,\" circa 1963.

146\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. S.Snyder, \"Memorandum for Dr.
Kullback-Harvest,\" 30 November i960.




147- (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. S.Snyder, \"Memorandum for Dr.
Kullback-Harvest,\" 30 November 1960.

148\. (U) Marcelle Size Knaack, Encyclopedia of U. S, Air Force Aircraft
and Missile Systems, vol II, \"Post-World War II Bombers 1945-1973\"

(Washington: Office of Air Force History, 1988).

149.4  B.Peters and C.Palmer, \"RYE, An Extended Capacity Remote Access
System,\" NSA Technical Journal IX (May 1964): 77- 0PS\#SI) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, ADVA-04, \"Survey of Prod Analytic Requirements for
Mechanizing Baud-Based Operations,\" 11 May 1961. 68} NSA CCH Series XII
Z, NSA Historian P2217 Historical Study: NSA\'s Telecommunications
Problems, 1952-1968, July 1969.

150\. (¥8) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, Edward F. Miller, \"Informal Note on
Early Special Purpose Devices Built at Control Data Corporation,\" July
1993. Some three percent of the traffic of the I hnachine was being
exploited by late 1957- (TS Laconic) % History of IDA-CRD,\" by Richard
Leibler.

151\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, MPRO-203, \"The Hairline Complex:
Part II, The Cipher Machine,\" Prepared by James L. Sapp, 17 May i960.

152\. (TS//8\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z,\*The Shearman Complex: Part VII,\"
Prepared by James L. Sapp, C425, circa i960. CSS//H) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, MPRO-03/4, \"The Hairline Complex: Part 7, Coiner,\" Prepared by
Richard W.Ader, iMay i960. (T9//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, MPRO-203,
\'The Hairline Complex: Part II, The Cipher Machine,\" Prepared by James
L.Sapp, 17 May i960. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z MPRO-203, \"The
Hairline Complex: Part III Clip Pin,\" Prepared by James L Sapp, 17 May
i960.

153\. (TS//8I) NSA AHA ACC 42444 \"Special and Emergency Funding of
NSA,\" (Russian high-level

\[ \"jcirca November 1957.

154\. Pffi\#8f) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Edward F. Miller, \"Informal Note
on Early Special Purpose Devices Built at Control Data Corporation,\"
July 1993.

155\. (TS//SI) NSA AHA ACC 42444 \"Special and Emergency Funding of
NSA,\" (Russian high-level

\[circa November 1957.

156\. US)- NSA CCH Series XII Z, Herbert W. Worden, \"EDP Machine
History,\" suggests that CDC

displaced Technitrol and other computer companies at this time for
special-purpose orders. Orders from IBM for special-purpose machines
declined, but it received a massive contract for the huge and very
secret Aztek computer, the embodiment of much Lightning research.
(TS//SI) (Laconiot Nooon) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F. Stahly, \"Fifty
Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985.

157\. CES\#H) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA\" 30 May 1953, and various years. (IS//Si) (Laoonio\>
Nocon) NSA CCH Series XIIZ, Glenn F. Stahly, \"Fifty Years of
Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985. (TS//SI) Leroy Wheatley
\"Content Addressed Memories,\" NSA Technical Journal IX (Winter 1964),
63. (T0//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Crossland.\" TFSINSA CCH Series
XIIZ (Library 5185024), \"Hembree.\"

158\. fS\^Edward S. Miller of NSA kept a scroll listing all the larger
Agency SPD projects. It shows how important CDC was to the Agency for
more than two decades. See NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Miller Scroll.\"

159\. fPSfr NSA CCH Series XIIZ, Edward F. Miller, \"Informal Note on
Early Special-Purpose Devices Built at Control Data Corporation,\" July
1993. (C) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Herbert W. Worden, \"EDP Machine
History.\"

160\. \<2&Hm NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"The Shearman Complex: Part VII,\"
Prepared byJames L. Sapp, C425, circa i960. CK\^Stf-NSA CCH Series XII
Z, MPRO-03/4, \"The Hairline Complex: Part 7, Coiner,\" Prepared by
Richard W. Ader, 1 May i960.

161\. {ES-) NSA AHA ACC 42444, \"HAIRLINE, funding,\" 1 December 1960
shows the request for additional Hairline funds for \$1,300,000 to
complete the largest of the early machines, Haviland.

162\. (U) Interview with Mr. Ray Miller of NSA January 1994,

163\. ITSftm) -(Laconic, Mooon) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F. Stahly,
\"Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985, 75-6.

164\. (Si NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No- 2, History of
NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital Qoniputers, 1964, 30.

P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)





165\. (U) The direct commercial version of Stretch certainly did not meet
its goals. It was only a bit more than one-half as powerful as expected.
(U) Charles J. Bashe et al., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT
Press, 1986), 373. Phillip Bochicchio remembers that Harvest\'s circuits
were much slower than ten meg. Interview, December 1994.

(U// rOUO) Coli n Burke graduated from San Francisco State College.
After spending almost twenty years as a professional musician, he
obtained his Ph.D. in history from Washington University, St. Louis. For
the I ast two decades he has been a professor at the University of
Maryland, Baltimore County. He has published in the fields of Ameri can
social and demographic history, the history of higher education, quanti
tati ve methods i n hi story, the hi story of computers, and the history
of information and cryptanal ysi s. He was lucky enough to be the senior
Pol and duri ng the year Communi sm as Schol ar i n Resi dence i n
NSA\'s History from 1991 to 1992.

Ful bright scholar in fel I. Dr. Burke served Center for Cryptologic

J

(U//T0U0) The Center for Cryptologic History woul d I i ke to extend i
ts deepest appreci ati on to Mr. James L. Boyl e, who edi ted and \"f i
ne-tuned\" Dr. Burke\'s manuscript. Mr. Boyle served as a contractor on
detai I to the CCH Publ i cati ons Team from October 1998 to February
2000.

rnn nrnnrT»nn»\|MT\|Ynri 1 fTTA. I\*iUTT, ftAH fiBP. AMD MIU/X1







\(U) Index

5202 Machine -161, 190-191, 223, 274

Abner - 2, 58, 248, 252, 253-257, 260-263, 278-279, 283, 290-294, 299,
310, 318

Adam and Eve -108-109, 123

Adams, C.F. - 278-280

Aiken, Howard - 31, 58, 242, 250, 317

Albatross - 211, 224-225, 266, 274-275

Alcatraz -176, 206, 208, 226

Alwac general-purpose computer - 293

Amber -161, 184, 188-189, 192, 195-197, 213, 223

Amdahl, Gene - 296

American Machine Gun -137

Arlington Hall - 70,132,135,140-141, 184, 205, 214-215, 225, 252-253,
255

Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA) - 264, 288, 272

Ashley, Dwight - 252

Atlas - 223, 242-248, 251, 253-256, 258-260, 263, 271, 274, 276, 278,
283, 290292, 321

AT&T Corp. - 14, 23, 300

Audico - 286, 321

Autoscritcher -156, 183-184, 193, 195, 226, 248

Azalea -139

Aztek - 315, 324

B-211 - 204, 266

Bachelor -139




Baker - 256, 307-310, 320-322

Baker, William O. - 268, 307

Banburismus - 68, 78, 86-88, 91,115

Bell Laboratories - 25, 46,158, 300-301, 306-307, 309

Berkeley, E.C. - 249

Bigelow, Julian - 250

Binary-Coded Decimal - 291

\"Black Friday\" - 257, 271

Bletchley Park - 4, 55, 60, 86-89, 91-94, 96-97, 104,117,159,188

Bloch, R.M. - 250, 260

Blois, Scott - 242, 273

Blueplate - 283, 315

Bogart - 282-283, 286-287, 292, 294, 307, 317, 321

Bomba - 85-87, 111

Bombe - 45, 55, 62, 68-69, 77-78, 83, 85-114,116-124, 127, 135-137,
139-140, 143, 145,150,155,157,158-160, 163-165, 167-168, 173-173,
176-181, 187,191,193, 204, 208, 210, 212, 219, 223-226, 236, 240-242,
266-267, 277, 281, 303, 313, 316, 324

Bowen, Harold -14-15, 21, 25, 28, 56, 93

Bowman, Ray - 252-253, 292, 295, 313, 318, 320

Braun, lieutenant -173

British Tabulating Machine Co. - 88

British work on the Bombe, - 45, 68, 86-89, 92, 94-95, 99,105, no, 115,
140, 180

Brooks, Fred - 297

BRUSA pact - 92

Brute Force - 39, 48, 62, 132-133, 135, 154,186, 264

Brute force searches - 85, 133

Buck, Dudley - 306

Page 328 TOP aCORCTOOOMlNTORCL TO USA, AUS, CAM, GBR AMP NZU/X1



Buddy - 286

Bulldozer - 71, 118,123,178-179, 191,193-194, 211

Bureau of Engineering (Navy) - 14-15, 17-20, 22, 33-34, 56

Bureau of Ships (BuShips) -15, 47-49, 54, 56, 59-61, 105, 235, 242, 245,
250, 260

Burroughs Corp. - 270

Bush, Vannevar - 6-8, 11,13-15, 17, 21, 23-31, 33-34, 36, 52-53, 58-59,
61, 233, 235-236, 250, 257, 264, 276, 282, 303

Cain and Abel -108, 123

Caldwell, Sam -25-26

Camel -132

Campaigne, Howard - 60, 236, 238-241, 244, 257, 267, 277, 281, 301, 305

Campbell, R.V.D. - 250

Canine, Ralph - 268, 287, 288, 302, 305

Carnegie Institution -10-11, 22, 24-25, 38

Cherry, Bill - 257

Chief of Naval Operations -13-14, 18, 29, 33, 77-79, 108, 114, 116-119,
121-124, 159, 193, 195, 218

Chi Square Test - 206

Cicero - 275

Qlly -113, 138

Clambake -138

Clark, Alva B. - 300

Clark, Mark - 288

Cobra - 94, 110, 180

Coiner - 315, 321, 324

Coleman - 28, 315

Coleridge - 228, 266

TOP SECRiTOCOMIMTOREIi TO USA, AUG, CAM, GBR AMD HZU/X1 Page 329



Colossus -45, 57-58, 80, 97-98, 109,119-120, 123, 141,157, 163,199 Colt
- 286

Comparator - 8, 14, 27-28, 30, 37-49, 52, 54-60, 63-64, 66-67, 70-71,
77-80, 86, 96, 98,114,119,128,135,143,153, 155,161,163, 172, 174-177,
188-191, 202, 213, 216-220, 235, 240, 256, 261, 274-276, 292, 299

Compton, Karl T. - 11

Condon, E.U. - 251

Connie Comparators - 216

Consecutive Stecker Knockout circuits -137

Consort - 276

Control Data Corp. (CDC) - 314, 324

Copperhead - 58, 60, 71-73, 80, 133,153-155, 161,163-164, 176,184,
186,191, 196, 213, 220, 222, 241, 291

Copperhead II - 58, 60 72, 80,154,161

Coral - 145-148, 150,152,160, 176

Countess - 276

Cramer, George - 297, 319

Cray, Seymour - 283, 314

Cryptanalytic Research Division (CRD) \[of IDA\] - 309

CX52 - 226, 268

Datamatic computer - 296

Daytona - 286

Deeds, Edward A. -25-27, 31, 56, 58,108,122

Deeter, Captain C.R. -183

Defense Calculator (IBM 701) - 276, 290

Delia - 275

Demon - 224, 231, 258

Denver Research - 275



TOP OCORrn/OOMINTOnCL TO UQA, AUQ, OAN, ODR AND NZU/X1

Dervish -4, 293, 314, 318, 321

Desch, Joseph - 26-27, 31-32, 266

Differential Analyser -10, 12, 27-28, 236

Digital recording -1, 6,11-12, 21-22, 24, 27-28, 31, 35, 4h 45-46,
57-58, 67, 88, 114, 130,142, 155-156, 163,166-169, 171-172, 176,182-184,
187, 189,195, 236, 241, 251-253, 258

Director of Naval Communications -13, 30, 34, 51, 91

Double Input - 112, 138

Drag grenades -113

Dragon -141, 159

Driscoll, Agnes Meyer -18, 49, 56, 59, 61, 309

Duchess - 276

Dudbuster -113, 138, 141, 157-158, 189-190

Duenna -71, 167-168, 177,180-183, 187,192-195, 204, 226, 234, 241

Dulong, Frederick - 43-45, 59

Dunwell, Stephen - 295, 297

Eachus, Joseph - 293, 296

Eastern Association for Computing Machinery - 249

Eastman-Kodak Corp. - 25, 40

Eckert, Presper - 57, 295

ECM (Navy cipher machine) -114

EDVAC - 213, 237-242, 244, 249-250, 252-255

Ellis, M. - 250

Ely, KB.™95

Engineering Research Associates (ERA) -14, 206-208, 211, 220-221, 223,
224, 226-227, 229-231, 235-236, 241-242, 245-248, 250, 252, 257, 259,
269

Engstrom, Howard - 29, 54, 269, 273, 282, 288, 300-304, 308, 310, 312,
320

ENIAC - 46, 57, 60,152,192, 213, 234, 236-238, 244-245

TOP SbLKhl/llQMIWIimEL IU USA, AUS, UAN, QBH AMD HZUlAI page 331


TOP QCORCT/fOOMIHTf/nCL TO USA, AUG, OAH, ODn AMD HZU/X1

Enigma -3, 4,17, 29, 36, 47, 49, 54\"55, 57, 60, 65, 68-69, 77-79,
83-95, 97-98, 100-124, 127-128, 131, 135-139, 142-143, 147-148, 150,
157-159, 170, 174, 176180, 183-184, 193-195, 203-204, 218, 224, 241,
257, 264, 266

Enigma Shark (M4) - 93

Evans, B.O. - 216

Farmer program - 218, 292-297, 299, 301, 310, 312, 314-315, 318-319

Fish system - 57, 96,108, 111,139,190, 199

Forrester, Jay-302, 304

Freak I - 130,156

Freehand (Project Ughtning) -289, 302-305, 311, 313-314, 316-317,
320-323

Friedman, William - 4,16, 22-23, 29, 31, 272, 291

aG\" (see also OP-20-G) -5-6, 15-19, 23, 33\'36, 39, 43\"47, 49-63,
66-70, 73-80, 83, 91-99, 103, 105, 108-109, 111-112, 114, 116-124,
127-128, 140,144-148, 150153,159-160, 162-165, 167,169, 172-173,
178,180-182, 184-189, 199, 201-208, 212-216, 220, 223-224, 233, 235-236,
238-246, 248, 258, 263, 266, 269, 271272, 277, 282, 297, 301-302, 304,
314

GEC codes -131

Gee Whizzer - 50-51, 61,173

Geheimschrieber -139

General Electric Corp. - 9-10, 25, 304

Giant -118, 177, 180, 194

Gingerich, Hugh - 253

Goldberg - 27, 29, 58, 78,142, 213-214, 221-224, 229-230, 233, 236, 240,
245247, 257-260, 264

Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS) - 86, 115,129,135,137-142, 146
178,194, 266, 303, 321

Grandad -177-178, 226

Grapevine -183

Gray Manufacturing Co. - 60, 70-71, 73-74, 79\~8o

Gray-NCR Comparator - 73, 135, 161,189-190



TOP 3CCRCT//COMINTORCL TO U3A, AUQ, OAN, QDR AND NZU/X1

Green, James -215

Grenades -112-114, 124,137-138, 174, 209 EO 3.3(h)(2)

Grier, Herbert E. - 38 p L 86\"36

Gypsy-142, 149,160

Hairline - 313-317, 321-322, 324

Hall, Marshall - 273-274, 282

Harvest - 3, 4, 261, 289, 296, 298-302, 304-308, 310-314, 316-319, 321,
323-325

Haviland - 315, 324

Haworth, Marge -313

Hebern Cipher Machine -17

Hecate - 208-211, 226, 275

Herwitz, Paul S. - 297

Hiawatha - 224, 231, 267

Highley, Albert - 217

Hofgaard relay computer - 26, 31

Hogan Laboratories - 223

Holtwick, Jack - 34, 56-57, 302, 313, 321

Honeywell Corp. - 31-32, 56, 58, 60, 280

Hooper, Stanford - 6-7, 12-23, 25, 28-30, 33-35, 43, 54-56, 272, 282,
307

Hoover Commission - 268, 288, 302

HOPS (Harvest Operating System) -312

Howard, John - 45-50, 52-54, 241-242, 270, 274, 314

Hut 8 - 86-87

Hypo - 68-70, 78-79, 96, 112, 125, 138, 176, 188-189, 195, 197, 223, 230

IBM Corp. - 264, 271, 275-278, 289-292, 295-299, 304, 306, 310-316, 320,
323-324




IBM 603 - 207-298

IBM 701 - 278, 290

IBM 702 - 291-292, 318

IBM 704 - 291, 321

IBM 705 - 310

Icky - 66-70, 73, 78,184, 188-190, 195, 197, 223

Index of Coincidence - 23, 36, 38, 63, 77, 86,147, 185

Index of Coincidence Machine - 23, 63, 77

Institute for Advanced Study - 236-238, 250

Isomorph - 23, 31, 39, 65-66, 80,128, 135, H7, 191

Jackson, Dugald - 9

Jade - 79, 144-148, 150,160, 173-174, 176

Jaeger, Jerry - 37

\"Jeeping\" -154, 164-165

JMA -132, 156

JN-11 -162

JN-25 (Japanese Naval Code) -120, 162

JN37 -166, 185-189

JN-39 (Japanese merchant ship/navy additive system) -161

JN87 -148-149

JN157 -145, 147, 160

JNA10 -146

JNA20 -146-147, 160

Japanese Fleet General-Purpose Code -150

Joos polygraphic counter -141

Jumbo Bombe -137




Keen, Harold (\"Doc\") - 88-89, 94

Kershner, Walter - 38

Kettering, Charles Boss - 25-26

Killian, James R. - 61, 289

Kryha -141

Kryha decipherer -141

Kullback, Solomon - 275, 296-297, 300

Lathrom, Leo - 313

Lawless, William - 297

Letter-writer (CXCO) - 75, 104, 141-142, 145, 147,149, 179

Liebler, Richard - 302, 323

Limited Selector -132

Logistics Research - 293

Longfellow - 224-225, 227, 231, 266-267, 281

Longitudinal Differencing machine - 141

Los Alamos (Parallel) project - 298, 302-304, 307-308

Lubkin, Samuel - 252-253

Lulu - 257

M8 - 104, 122

M9 - 104, 122, 132

Macdonald, Waldron Shapleigh - 29, 38, 42-44, 56-59,

Madame X (\"003\") -118, 136-140, 157, 164-165, 168, 177, 202, 204, 211,
217

Magic 3-5, 56, 90,115,120, 128,132,155,199-200, 202, 204, 265, 268

Mamba -142, 149-150, 161

Mammoth -105, 110, 118

Mark -194



Mark II - 154, 161

Marston, Dale - 297, 313

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) -128-129, 135,153-156, 165,
168 235, 241-242, 246, 259, 267, 302, 304, 306, 309, 317-319, 322, 325

Mathew - 81

Mauchly, John - 80, 156, 192, 236, 238, 250, 272

May, William - 249

McPherson, John C. - 274, 294, 304

Meader, Ralph - 270

Meccano - 287

Mercury - 73, 171-173, 178, 184-185, 187, 192, 212, 241, 258

Mercury Full Selector -171

Mike - 76, 79,156, 205, 220, 222

Millikan, Robert - 9

Mistress - 276

Mona -188

Monogram -194, 219, 225-226, 228-231, 243, 245, 259, 276, 281-282

Moore School - 234, 236-238, 257

Murdock - 275

National Academy of Sciences -18, 24

National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics -10, 14, 26

National Bureau of Standards -11, 13, 21, 208, 241, 243-244, 249,
251-254, 261, 270

National Cash Register (NCR) - 26, 120, 122,148,168,173,181, 186-187,
206, 217, 219-220, 275, 282

National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) - 8, 10, 24, 27, 45,192, 200,
236, 272

National Electronics Laboratory - 219




National Research Council -10, 14, 24

National Science Foundation - 8, 28

National Security Agency (NSA) -1, 3,5, 264-267, 271, 275-280, 285-292,
294-317

National Union Radio 276

Naval Computing Machine Laboratory (NCML) - 55, 83,105, 148, 159,
170,192193, 205, 218-220, 229-230, 258-259, 269, 271, 282

Naval Research Laboratory -13, 15, 20, 25,192, 219, 229

Navy Change (NC) Machines - 74, 151, 153, 167

Neely - 260, 286

Neumann, John von - 236-238, 250, 258, 288, 302-303, 320

New London Research Laboratory - 9

Noble, Lieutenant -164

Nomad - 229, 265, 276-280, 283, 285-287, 291-293, 298-299, 304, 311, 318

NORC - 278, 290

Norris, Bill - 219, 259-260

NSA Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) - 285

Oano Company - 70

Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) - 15-16

Office of Naval Research -14-15, 28, 56, 79, 219, 229, 242

Office of Research and Inventions -15, 47, 59, 200

Office of Scientific Research and Development - 24, 27, 45

O\'Malley - 206-208, 226, 233, 281

Ophis - 224

OP-20-G -5-6, 15-23, 27-30, 33-37, 39, 43-47, 49-63, 66-71, 73-80, 83,
90-99 102, 105, 108-112, 114, 116-124, 127-130, 135-136, 138-140, 142,
144-148, 150, 152-153, 155-165, 168-169, 171, 173, 176-178, 181,
184-185, 189, 191-193, 200201, 206, 208, 210-211, 215, 217-221, 223,
225-226, 229-230, 233, 235, 237239, 241-242, 244-245, 247, 249-250, 253,
257, 259-260, 263, 266-270, 272




276, 28l, 283, 298, 300-301, 308, 314, 321

0P-20-G-Y - 15

Opal -142

Orlando - 286

Oyster Schuker -138

Palmer, Ralph L, - 274, 276, 290-291, 295

Parke, Commander L.W. -143

Parker, John - 270-271

Pearson, Drew - 271

Pendergrass, James T. - 236, 238-243, 247, 249, 251, 257-258, 260

Philco Corp. - 81, 294

Pink - 224

PIT system - 279

Plantation - 297-298, 300-301, 319

Pluggable reflector - 84, 180, 182-183, 194

Pluggable-Series Grenade -113

Pluto - 267

Pogoda - 266

Polish attack on Enigma - 84-86

Polygrenade -113

Pomerene, James - 297

Powers -18-19

Pullman -315

Purple - 4, 31, 36, 44, 59-6o, 90,128-129, 131, 141-142, 144-147, 203,
224, 264, 266, 308

Purple Dudbuster -141

Python -142, 146-148, 193



Query -113

Rachman, Jan - 234, 244

Radio Corporation of America (RCA) - 219, 222, 234-236, 239, 241,
243-244, 250, 257-258, 272, 283, 306

RAM-2 - 64, 77-78

Rapid Analytical Machine (RAM) -33, 196-197, 204-205, 211-212, 219, 221,
223 225-231

Rapid Arithmetical Machine - 26, 35

Rapid Document Selector - 64

Rapid Machines - 45, 47, 53\"55, 71-73, 76-77, 83, 99, 106,129,151

Rapid Machines program - 45, 83, 99

Rapid Selector - 35, 61, 79,189, 270

Rattler - 160, 173-177, 192-193

Raven, Frank -173

Raytheon Corp. - 248, 250-252, 256, 260-261, 278-280, 285-286, 296

RCA Selectron tube - 243

Red Code (Japanese) - 19, 150

Redman project - 307

Redmond, Captain -51

Remington-Rand Corp. -19, 57, 272, 278, 282, 286, 294-295, 297-298, 301,
314-315

Research Corporation of New York City -11

REVAC - 252

Robertson, H.P. - 285

Robin -147, 190, 223, 225, 275, 282

Robinson (Heath) - 58, 80, 97-98, 109, 119,122, 190

Rob Roy - 287, 294

Rochefort, Joseph J. - 152

Rockefeller Differential Analyser -12




Rockefeller Foundation -12, 24, 46, 219

Rogers, William Barton - 7-8

Rogue system - 293

Roseboro, Mary - 249

Rosen, Leo - 249

Rowlett, Frank - 23, 59-60, 273

Rudolph - 315

Safford, Laurance F. - 270

Satyr -141, 159

Schmitt, Samuel - 297

Scritching - 87, 115,181

SEAC - 253-256, 261

Seiler, Don - 44, 153-154

Selective Square -132

Selector -14, 28, 35, 58, 61, 64, 67, 73, 79-80, 132, 161-162, 164-166,
257, 270

Self-Detector -113

Serpent -176-176, 193

Shannon, Claude - 274, 303

Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) - 22, 127, 286, 292, 295-297, 302

SIGSALY -140

Simple Frequency Counter - 76

Sinkov, Abraham - 273

Skate - 214, 216-217, 223, 228

Skinner, John - 75, 153

Sled -4, 213-218, 221-223, 227-228, 233-234, 240, 245, 253, 259, 274,
279, 289 292-293, 299, 321, 323

Slide Run -132-135, 151,153-154, 156, 160-161, 164, 167, 189, 191

Page 340 TOP SFrRFWTIMINT//FFI TO USA, AUS, CAM, GBR AMD NZU/X1



Slide Run machine -132-134, 151,153-154, 156, 161,167,189, 191

Sliding Grenade -113

Smith, Lybrand -15

Snyder, Samuel S. - 2-3, 6, 29, 31, 58, 249, 257, 259-262, 284, 293,
313, 317-320, 322-323

Solo - 294, 296-297

Special Cryptologic Advisory Group (SCAG) - 273, 285, 300, 317, 320

Squelcher -113

Steinhardt, Lawrence - 59, 71, 73, 79, 145, 148, 153, 155, 164, 167,
173, 175-176, 186, 235

Stethoscope - 257

Stibitz, George - 25, 157

Stone, Earl - 272, 267, 277

Stratton, Samuel W. - 8,10-11, 13, 251

\"Stretch\" project - 297

\"Super\" project -184

Swallow - 286

Tampa - 286

Tan - 284

Tape Processing Computer (TPM) - 290

Taylor, Richard - 37-38

Technitrol - 253, 256, 275, 286, 290, 324

Tessie - 64-68, 77-78, 96, 135, 143, 147, 153, 176, 189,190-191

Tiltman, John - 92

Tompkins, C.B. - 235, 242, 269-270, 273-274, 282, 301

Topaz -149-150, 160

Tordella, Louis - 242, 322

Tractor - 298, 310-312, 316, 319, 323




Transcrypt (Alpha) - 311

Tune-Seek - 287

Tunny - 4, 116, 119, 141,155,159, 190, 223, 227, 257

Turing, Alan - 242, 250

U-boats -54, 91, 93, 99,105,108

Uhr Box - 84

UKUSA agreement - 92

Ultra -3-4, 6, 26, 45, 47, 49, 55\"56, 61-62, 83, 86, 89, 92-94,
99,103-105, 108, 111,114-116, 120, 122,124, 128-129, 135,142, 155, 201,
257, 264-265, 267-268, 282, 289, 301, 303-304, 307

Uncle Dick -183

Uncle Walter - 112, 194

UNIVAC - 38, 57,192, 208, 238-239, 241-242, 250-251, 260, 272, 278, 289,
295 318

Universal Plugboard -113

Venona - 265-266, 276

Viper -142, 144-145, 147, 160,173,193

Vivian - 275

WACs -132

Warlock I - 210

Watson, Tom - 278, 289-290, 315

Weaver, Warren - 301-302

Welcher - 315

Welchman, Gordon - 29, 60, 86, 88-89, 95, 109, 114-115

Wenger, Joseph - 235-236, 241, 269, 271, 273, 282, 300, 313

Western Electric - 25, 136,157, 250




Whirlwind -192, 227, 241-242, 246, 267 Wiener, Norbert - 9 Williams,
Harry N. - 26, 31-32 Wynn-Williams - 94, 97-98, 110, 118 Yardley,
Herbert - 19, 127





